OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
Election Observation Mission
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Early Parliamentary Elections, 11 December 2016
INTERIM REPORT
3 – 21 November 2016
25 November 2016
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
After two years of political crisis, the main political forces agreed to dissolve the parliament for the second time this year.
Early parliamentary elections were called for 11 December.
On 3 November, the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) established an Election Observation Mission (EOM) to observe these elections.
The  electoral  legal  framework  was  substantially  revised  in  2015.
Further  changes  in  2016 introduced temporary mechanisms for the political oversight of the electoral process, including a requirement for citizens with “questionable” voter registration data to actively register for these elections, as well as the formation of a Temporary Commission for media oversight.
The State Election Commission (SEC) official sessions have so far been open to observers and media.
However, the SEC has also met frequently in closed working sessions, where substantive discussions took place.
Most Municipal Election Commissions are operational and preparations are underway, but some lack adequate premises and equipment.
Provisions for equitable representation of ethnic groups and gender appear to be respected in the election administration.
There are 1,784,524 voters preliminarily registered for these elections.
As mistrust in the accuracy of the register persisted during previous elections, the SEC was tasked to maintain the register.
It reviewed  it  by  cross-checking  several  databases  as  well  as  by  conducting  field-checks.
As mandated by a new amendment to the Electoral Code, the SEC deleted 28,341 voters from the register who have not re-registered.
In spite of some criticism of the field-checks, a number of OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors opined that public confidence in the voter register has increased as the review process has so far led to a limited number of requests for corrections.
The SEC approved 20,629 applications for voting abroad.
Numerous applications were submitted from the same email address.
Some political parties stated to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that they have assisted voters with their applications.
The SEC registered, in a generally inclusive manner, 58 candidate lists submitted by 6 political parties and 5 coalitions.
The 40 per cent gender requirement for the lists was respected.
The lists of the two main contestants included representatives of smaller ethnic communities, some in likely winnable positions.
Several opposition parties expressed an intention to seek votes from the ethnic Albanian community.
Most political parties started mobilizing their electorate prior to the official campaign period, which began on 21 November.
The pre-election atmosphere has been generally calm, with some isolated violent incidents noted.
A number of allegations of pressure on public employees to support specific parties were reported to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM.
Public media is required to provide equitable news coverage of electoral contestants, grant access to free airtime and organize debates.
Substantial media reforms foreseen in the Przino Agreement  have yet to be agreed upon.
OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors raised concerns such as widespread self-censorship resulting from political pressure on media, and cases of inflammatory language and verbal attacks on journalists.
On 7 November, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM began qualitative and quantitative media monitoring.
Two  prominent  civil  society  organizations,  MOST  and  CIVIL,  are  observing  these  elections.
MOST plans to conduct parallel vote tabulation.
INTRODUCTION
Following an official invitation, on 3 November the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) established an Election Observation Mission (EOM) to observe the 11 December early parliamentary elections.
The EOM, headed by Tana de Zulueta, consists of a 14-member core team based in Skopje and 20 long-term observers (LTOs) deployed throughout the country on 9 November.
Mission members are drawn from 22 OSCE participating States.
Participating States  have  been  requested  to  second  300  short-term  observers  (STOs)  to  observe  election  day procedures.
BACKGROUND AND POLITICAL CONTEXT
Following the 2014 early parliamentary elections, six political parties and coalitions were represented in  the  parliament.
The  Internal  Macedonian  Revolutionary  Organization  –  Democratic  Party  for Macedonian  National  Unity  (VMRO-DPMNE),  with  61  seats,  and  the  Democratic  Union  for Integration  (DUI),  with  19  seats,  formed  the  government.
The  opposition  included  the  Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM) with 34 seats and the Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) with 7 seats.
The National Democratic Revival (NDR) and Citizens Option for Macedonia (GROM) had one seat each.
The  opposition  claimed  that  the  2014  elections  were  rigged  and  decided  to  temporarily  boycott parliament.
The crisis deepened in February 2015 with a “wiretapping scandal”, when incriminating wiretapped recordings allegedly implicated government and public officials in corruption, election fraud, abuse of power and illegal surveillance of citizens were released, which led to sustained and widespread protests.
On 2 June, as part of the Przino Agreement, early parliamentary elections were initially called for 24 April 2016.
The elections were later postponed to 5 June on the grounds that key conditions had not been met, namely cleaning of the voter register, media reforms, and safeguards to  separate state and party activities.
Prior  to  the  scheduled  elections,  the  opposition  announced  a  boycott  and,  of  the  four signatories of the Przino Agreement, only VMRO-DPMNE submitted candidate lists.
On 25 May, the Constitutional Court declared the dissolution of parliament unconstitutional and the 5 June elections were cancelled.
On 20 July, with facilitation from the European Union and United States, the four main parties reached a new agreement.
It emphasized two conditions for holding elections; enhancing the accuracy of the voter register and strengthening the media legal framework.
On 31 August, the four parties announced  that conditions for “credible elections” were met and elections were scheduled for 11 December.
On 17 October, after two years of political crisis, the parliament was dissolved for the second time this year.
ELECTORAL SYSTEM AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK
Between 120 and 123 members of parliament (MPs) will be elected for a four-year term through a proportional representation system using closed lists.
Twenty MPs will be elected from each of the six in-country electoral districts, and up to three from a single out-of-country district.
The Electoral Code permits deviations of up to five per cent from the average number of registered voters for in-country districts.
On 25 October, the Unity party challenged the holding of elections at the Constitutional Court as district 6 deviates by 5.65 per cent.
The Court has yet to decide on the matter.
Parliamentary elections are governed by a number of legal documents that include the Constitution, the Electoral Code, the Law on Political Parties, the Law on Financing Political Parties, provisions of the Criminal Code, the Law on Media and the Law on Audio and Audiovisual Media Services, which are supplemented by regulations promulgated by the State Election Commission (SEC).
The legal framework was substantially revised in 2015 as a result of the Przino Agreement.
The 2016 OSCE/ODIHR and the Council of Europe’s Venice Commission’s Joint Opinion on the Electoral Code concluded  that  many  previous  recommendations  have  been  met,  particularly  those  related  to  the principle of equal suffrage for out-of-country voting, the composition and competences of the SEC, level playing field for media coverage during the campaign period, strengthening party and campaign finance  reporting  and  auditing,  improved  provisions  for  the  separation  of  party  and  state  and introducing deadlines for courts to decide on electoral disputes.
However, it notes that the Electoral Code would benefit from a complete review in order to harmonize it internally and with other relevant laws, while some longstanding issues require further consideration, including in respect of candidate registration  and  campaigning.
Additional  changes  made  to  Electoral  Code  in  July  2016  contain provisions applicable only to the current elections.
These include forming a Temporary Commission for  media  oversight  and  requiring  citizens  with  “questionable”  voter  registration  data  to  actively register for these elections.
ELECTION ADMINISTRATION
The  elections  are  administered  by  the  State  Election  Commission  (SEC),  80  Municipal  Election Commissions (MECs), and 3,480 Electoral Boards (EBs).
An additional 46 EBs are established in diplomatic-consular offices for out-of-country voting.
The SEC is composed of nine members: three nominated by ruling parliamentary parties, three by opposition parties, and three independent experts selected in an open recruitment.
The president and deputy are elected from among the non-partisan members.
The SEC recruited temporary legal and IT personnel nominated by the main four political parties.
The SEC is supported by 34 permanent regional offices.
MECs are composed of five members who are randomly selected from among employees of the state and  municipal  administration.
While  most  MECs  are  operational  and  election  preparations  are  underway, some lack adequate premises and equipment.
EBs comprise five members – three randomly selected public employees and two appointees from the main ruling and opposition parties.
The Electoral Code provides for equitable representation of ethnic groups and gender in election administration bodies.
These requirements appear to have been met at MECs and EBs.
Two of nine SEC members are women and three are ethnic Albanians.
The SEC official sessions were open to observers and media.
However, the SEC also met in closed working sessions, where substantive discussion of matters to be decided in the public sessions took place.
The SEC decisions were generally adopted unanimously, although members often engaged in lengthy procedural discussions.
The decisions were published on the SEC website in a timely manner.
The requirement that the minutes of the SEC sessions be made public within 48 hours has not been adhered to consistently.
The SEC prepared training manuals for MECs and EBs.
MECs were trained in June and July, and a second round of training sessions is ongoing.
The training observed by the OSCE/ODIHR EOM was positively assessed by the participants and civil society.
VOTER REGISTRATION
Citizens 18 years of age by election day are eligible to vote, unless deprived of their legal capacity by a court decision.
Voter registration is passive, with the exception of voters temporarily residing abroad who must actively register.
Voting rights are granted to persons with a registered residence in the country who have a valid identification card or passport.
The SEC is responsible for maintaining the voter register based on data extracted from civil and population registers.
There are 1,784,524 voters registered for these elections as of 18 November, including 20,629 voters abroad.
Longstanding mistrust in the accuracy of the voter register persisted in the previous elections, with allegations of various illegal entries.
The SEC was tasked to review the voter register by cross-checking entries against the databases of 11 state institutions, which was followed by field checks that were observed by the four main political parties.
On 26 April, the SEC reported 44,308 voters identified as living at addresses with more than 20 registered voters or where voters with more than 6 surnames were registered.
After subsequent field checks, 39,502 voters with “questionable registration” were required to actively re-register.
On 13 November, the SEC decided to delete 28,341 voters from the register  who  did  not  re-register.
In  spite  of  criticism  of  field-checking  procedures,  a  number  of OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors opined that confidence in the voter register has increased as the process led to a limited number of corrections.
Voters can request registration or amendments to data in the voter register at SEC regional offices throughout the year.
In election years, voters can check their data also during a public scrutiny period  (this year the period was 28 October to 11 November).
In spite of the legal provision, the SEC regional offices did not display printed voter lists and voters could only check their personal data on computers at SEC offices or online.
In total, 10,274 voters visited the SEC offices, yet the number of requested corrections was low.
The SEC notified the voters about the outcome of their requests only by email, as required by law.
As such, voters without email addresses were not informed.
At the end of the public scrutiny period, the SEC had to provide electoral contestants with copies of the preliminary voter lists.
They did so with a two-day delay, caused by internal disagreements over the format of the data.
Electoral contestants can request corrections until 23 November.
The SEC approved 20,629 of 21,029 applications for voting abroad.
Numerous applications were submitted from the same email address.
Some political parties informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that they assisted voters with their applications.
Online application required voters to declare their ethnicity, which, according to the SEC, was necessary to print electoral materials in minority languages.
Voters who did not register can vote in-country at the polling station of their last residency.
CANDIDATE REGISTRATION
Any eligible voter can be a candidate for parliament, except those sentenced by a final court decision to more than six months and who have not completed their sentence.
The law also identifies a range of government and government-related positions incompatible with candidacy.
Registered  political  parties,  coalitions  of  political  parties,  and  groups  of  voters  can  nominate candidates.
The latter were required to provide at least 1,000 supporting signatures of voters residing in the respective district.
In line with a previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendation, for the first time, a voter could sign in support of more than one candidate list; however, the signatures are still required to be collected in front of a SEC employee at a regional SEC office.
Candidate  registration  was  generally  inclusive.
By  the  legal  deadline  of  11  November,  the  SEC registered 6 political parties and 5 coalitions fielding a total of 1,092 candidates on 58 lists.
In line with an enhanced quota to increase women’s participation, 41 per cent of candidates are women, although only four women are top of the lists.
CAMPAIGN AND CAMPAIGN FINANCE
The official campaign period began on 21 November and will end 24 hours before election day.
The majority of political parties, however, started mobilizing their voters prior to this period, organizing some events and establishing campaign headquarters.
Parties informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that small scale meetings and door-to-door canvassing will be the principal methods to reach out to voters  during the campaign period.
The main campaign messages relate to the economy, employment, justice and youth emigration.
The pre-election atmosphere has been generally calm, although some violent incidents were noted.
A number of unsubstantiated allegations of pressure on public employees to support specific parties were reported to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM.
Electoral contestants are required to register a unique tax number and open a dedicated bank account for campaign finance purposes.
Individuals may donate up to EUR 3,000, while legal entities may donate up to EUR 30,000.
Foreign or anonymous donations and those from state-owned, religious and charitable organizations are prohibited.
Contestants may spend a maximum of EUR 1.8 per registered voter in a district.
Each list will be reimbursed by EUR 0.25 for each vote won, provided it obtains at least 1.5 per cent of the votes cast in the district.
Supervision of campaign finance is primarily carried out by the State Audit Office.
Contestants have to submit two interim and one final report to the SEC, State Audit Office and State Commission for Preventing Corruption.
All reports are to be published on the website of each institution.
MEDIA
The media scene includes over 130 radio and TV channels operating in a relatively small market with media outlets divided along political and ethnic lines.
Television is the most important media and the source  of  information  for  some  75  per  cent  of  the  population.
Many  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM interlocutors expressed concerns about dominant private broadcasters supporting the views of the government,  which  has  a  strong  presence  on  the  advertising  market.
Widespread  self-censorship resulting  from  political  pressure  on  media,  along  with  cases  of  inflammatory  language  by  some journalists and verbal attacks on journalists (especially by government officials) were among other concerns raised with the OSCE/ODIHR EOM.
The Electoral Code governs the media coverage of elections.
Substantial amendments in 2015 address government-financed  advertising  and  coverage  of  state  officials  favouring  political  parties  during elections.
The law requires balanced and equitable coverage during the official campaign period and obliges broadcast media and Internet portals to act in a fair and impartial manner should they cover the elections.
The public broadcaster, Macedonian Radio and Television (MRT), is additionally required to grant access to free airtime and organize debates.
Political advertising is allowed only in the private media.
Parliamentary parties are entitled to a larger proportion of news coverage, free airtime and paid advertising compared to other contestants.
Substantial media reforms foreseen in the Przino Agreement have yet to be agreed upon.
The 2016 amendments to the Electoral Code related to media are applicable only for the upcoming elections.
The editor-in-chief  of  MRT  was  appointed  by  the  opposition  100  days  prior  to  these  elections.
The supervisory role of the Agency for Audio and Audiovisual Media Services (AVMS), which is the  regulatory body for broadcast media and media coverage of elections, was supplanted by a Temporary Commission.
This five-member body includes nominees from the four main political parties, and a fifth selected by the four members, and assesses media coverage based on regular media monitoring reports prepared by the AVMS.
As of 21 November, the Commission decided on a number of cases of biased coverage, hidden campaigning by government officials and government advertising.
Based on its  recommendations,  the  AVMS  forwarded  to  the  basic  court  14  initiatives  for  misdemeanour procedures including six warnings (MRT, Nova, Alfa, and Sitel) and eight fines (Alfa, Nova, and Sitel).
So far the court decided on one Nova case, dismissing it.
On 7 November, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM commenced qualitative and quantitative media monitoring of eight television channels and five daily newspapers.
COMPLAINTS AND APPEALS
The SEC deals with most civil and administrative disputes related to elections, and the State Audit Office and the State Commission for Preventing Corruption deal with complaints related to campaign finance and misuse of administrative resources, respectively.
Their decisions may be appealed to the Administrative Court.
The basic courts deal with electoral offences, due to their criminal nature.
The Social Democratic Party of Macedonia and the People’s Movement for Macedonia appealed to the Administrative Court the SEC decisions to reject their candidate lists.
The court considered these cases in closed session, and rejected all appeals as ungrounded.
All decisions have been published on the court website.
The SEC has adopted a procedures rulebook for dealing with complaints and appeals.
An electronic system for case and complaint management, required by the Electoral Code, has been developed but is yet to be tested for these elections.
So far the SEC has received few complaints.
PARTICIPATION OF NATIONAL MINORITIES
Inter-ethnic relations remain a relevant political factor, and political parties tend to reach out mainly to their  own  communities.
Parties  representing  minorities  other  than  ethnic  Albanians  expressed dissatisfaction to the OSCE/ODHIR EOM for having been excluded from the political process that led to scheduling elections for 11 December.
They also voiced concern that the electoral system provides no mechanisms to promote national minority participation, such as reserved or guaranteed seats in the parliament,  which,  in  turn,  forces  them  to  join  coalitions  led  by  parties  representing  larger communities.
Some concerns were expressed to the OSCE/ODHIR EOM on the extent to which the list of disputed voters, and the need for them to actively re-register, was not adequately advertised to reach all communities.
The SDSM and VMRO-DPMNE coalitions included in their lists representatives of almost all smaller communities, some in likely winnable positions.
The SDSM voiced its aim to seek votes from the ethnic  Albanian  community.
The  electoral  contest  is  more  competitive  in  the  ethnic  Albanian communities, with the coalition Alliance for Albanians and BESA challenging the dominant position of  DUI.
Despite initial disagreements, most leaders of different parties representing the Roma community decided to run in the VMRO-DPMNE coalition.
CITIZEN AND INTERNATIONAL OBSERVERS
The Electoral Code allows for citizen, partisan and international observation.
Two prominent civil society organizations are observing these elections: MOST has 80 LTOs and intends to deploy some 3,300 STOs, and also plans to conduct parallel vote tabulation; CIVIL has 35 LTOs, 10 mobile teams and intends to deploy some 300 STOs.
MISSION ACTIVITIES
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM commenced its work in Skopje on 3 November.
The Head of Mission met with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the SEC, and representatives of political parties, media, civil society organizations, the OSCE Mission to Skopje and the international community.
The EOM established  contacts  with  electoral  stakeholders  at  all  levels.
The  OSCE  Parliamentary  Assembly (OSCE  PA),  the  Parliamentary  Assembly  of  the  Council  of  Europe  (PACE)  and  the  European Parliament (EP) intend to deploy observer delegations for election day observation.
The English version of this report is the only official document.
Unofficial translations are available in the Macedonian and Albanian languages.
