Promoting a Multi-Stakeholder Approach to Preventing and Countering Violent Extremism and Radicalization that Lead to Terrorism
Summary report of roundtable discussions on the National Strategy for Countering Violent Extremism in the Republic of North Macedonia
Published by the Monitoring Unit of the OSCE Mission to Skopje. 
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means - electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise - without the prior written permission of the publishers. This restriction does not apply to making digital or hard copies of this publication for internal use within the OSCE, and for personal or educational use when for non-profit and non-commercial purposes, providing that copies be accompanied by an acknowledgment of the OSCE as the source.
OSCE Mission to Skopje
The materials in this publication are for ease of reference only.
Although the OSCE Mission to Skopje has invested the utmost care in its development, it does not accept any liability for the accuracy and completeness of any information, instructions and advice provided or for any misprints.
The contents of this publication, the views, opinions, findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the OSCE.
For these reasons, no claims can be made against the OSCE in respect of potential consequences from the reliance on information or conclusions contained in this publication
Acknowledgments
The OSCE Mission to Skopje would like to thank Mission Members Alush Doda and Marina Mclellan for jointly developing and drafting the contents of this publication and designing, developing and implementing the activities that led to its compilation.
The OSCE Mission to Skopje would also like to thank our partners, Borche Petrevski, National Coordinator for Countering Violent Extremism and Countering Terrorism; Xheladin Ajvazi, Deputy National Coordinator for Countering Violent Extremism; Zlatko Apostoloski, Deputy National Coordinator for Countering Terrorism; Marija Mihajloska Jankulovska, National Committee for Countering Violent Extremism and Counter Terrorism; our implementing partner Center for Research and Policy Making, in particular Marija Risteska, Ivan Stefanovski and Aleksandar Cekov; and Petar Arsovski.
We would like to express our gratitude to the roundtable participants for their contributions and collaboration, and extend a special acknowledgment to the Monitoring Unit of the OSCE Mission to Skopje for their support.
Glossary
This glossary serves to clarify key terms used in this report.
The definitions are for this report only and are not official OSCE definitions.
Community - women, men, social groups and institutions that are based in the same area and/or have shared interests.
Civil society – a diverse body of civil actors, communities, and formal or informal associations with a wide range of roles who engage in public life, seeking to advance shared values and objectives.
Civil society actors – key representatives of the community including women, youth, community and religious leaders who are well positioned to provide impactful and long-lasting contributions to the well-being of society.
Community policing – a philosophy and organizational strategy that promote partnerships between the police force and the public to increase the effective and efficient identification, prevention and resolution of problems of crime, and address concerns about physical safety and security, social disorder and neighbourhood decay in order to improve the quality of life for everyone.
Countering violent extremism – proactive actions to counter efforts by violent extremists to radicalize, recruit and mobilize followers to engage in violent acts and to address specific factors that facilitate and enable violent extremist recruitment and radicalization to violence.
Counter-terrorism – policies, laws and strategies developed by state actors and implemented primarily by law enforcement, intelligence agencies, and sometimes the military, aimed at thwarting terrorist plots and dismantling terrorist organizations
“Foreign terrorist fighters” – commonly used to refer to individuals who have travelled from their home states to other states to participate in or support terrorist acts, including in the context of armed conflict, especially in Iraq and Syria, as outlined in UN Security Council Resolution 2178 (2014).
The term is contested because of its breadth, vagueness, and associated human rights issues.
Former violent extremists or “formers” – individuals who have disengaged from a path to violent extremism and radicalization that lead to terrorism and who can have a useful role in raising awareness and communicating credible counternarratives.
Gender perspective – awareness and consideration of differential needs, experiences, and status of women and men based on socio-cultural context.
Intervention programming – programmes that target “at-risk” audiences and seek to intervene in a person’s pathway to terrorist radicalization before the line of criminal activity is crossed.
Prevention programming – programmes that seek to reduce the appeal of violent extremism and build resilience to its influence and spread.
The types of programmes that may fall under this category are: awareness raising on the threat of violent extremism in schools, public information campaigns and community debates, inter-faith and intra-faith dialogues, capacity building for teachers and community leaders in identifying and supporting those vulnerable to radicalization, media messaging and counter-/alternative narrative campaigns, and community trust building with law enforcement, etc.
Protective factors – positive characteristics or conditions that can moderate the negative effects of risk factors and foster healthier individuals, families, and communities, thereby increasing personal and/or community safety and wellbeing.
These factors can include expectation management, positive family or social networks, religious knowledge, education that teaches tolerance and respect for others, and a fairer job market.
Radicalization that leads to terrorism – the dynamic process whereby an individual comes to accept terrorist violence as a possible, perhaps even legitimate, course of action.
This may eventually, but not necessarily, lead this person to advocate, act in support of, or to engage in, terrorism.
Rehabilitation programming – programmes that target individuals radicalized to violence and possibly their families at different stages of radicalization.
The types of programmes include both prison-based de-radicalization/disengagement and post-criminal aftercare programmes focusing on the rehabilitation and reintegration of terrorist offenders and returning foreign fighters, and their reentry into society.
Some programmes offer educational and vocational training, counselling, employment opportunities and ideological re-education, etc.
Referrals – include individuals who are referred to multiagency or other multistakeholder programmes and who display observable behaviours indicating they might be at risk of or vulnerable to engagement in VERLT or already on the path to VERLT.
Referrals also include individuals whom a program refers to an agency, institution, organization, or professionals for an intervention or other support following a professional assessment of the individual’s risks, vulnerabilities, and protective factors.
Referral mechanism – a formal or informal mechanism involving practitioners and professionals from different disciplines and/or agencies and organizations that aims to identify, assess, assist, and treat those individuals showing signs of being at risk of or vulnerable to engagement in VERLT or already on the path to VERLT.
Resilience – the ability to withstand, respond to and recover from a wide range of harmful and adverse events.
Risk assessment – the process involving the systematic gathering and interpretation of information pertaining to an individual to provide data for properly trained professionals to make decisions relevant to the likelihood that a specific individual will engage in harmful action and to assess the nature and severity of the harm.
Risk assessment tool – a framework for collecting data to assist with decisionmaking that provides a non-discriminatory method for examining in a structured way an individual’s propensity to cause harm and the nature and severity of that risk, based on available information from multiple sources.
Risk factor – any attribute such as belief, appearance, experience, or environment that increases the likelihood of the outcome being measured (e.g., that an individual will engage in VERLT) occurring.
Whole-of-society approach – an approach to preventing and countering violent extremism advocated by policymakers and practitioners that envisions a role for multiple sectors and civil society actors in prevention, intervention, and deradicalization/disengagement rehabilitation programmes.
1. INTRODUCTION
The spread of violent extremism continues to pose a serious global challenge that the OSCE is committed to preventing and countering through its comprehensive approach to security while ensuring that human rights and the rule of law are respected.
The rapid rise of Daesh/ISIS in Iraq and Syria resulted in hundreds of foreign terrorist fighters leaving the Western Balkans to support their cause, including an estimated 110 citizens from the Republic of North Macedonia that may be higher given that no recent official data exist.
The dismantling of many Daesh safe havens since 2017 has also created a new set of challenges due to the flow of returning foreign terrorist fighters to the region.
At the same time, the threat of violent extremism continues to evolve, with new forms emerging – such as far-right movements and extreme nationalism – which further polarize societies and may also lead to community-based violence.
The OSCE Ministerial Council Declaration 4/15 affirms that terrorism and violent extremism cannot be linked to any race, ethnicity, nationality or religion.
It is widely acknowledged that violent extremism and radicalization that leads to terrorism (VERLT) is a complex problem with transnational dimensions, yet its drivers and solutions are closely tied to the context in which it exists.
In addition to national governments playing a vital role in coordinating and supporting early prevention activities, the OSCE also recognizes the need to place local stakeholders at the forefront of prevention efforts.
The importance of a multi-stakeholder approach to preventing and countering VERLT
In line with established best practice in the OSCE, P/CVERLT requires a holistic approach with the engagement of diverse institutions and civil society together with local communities.
In particular, a public health approach to prevention programming offers opportunities for practitioners to use lessons learned from the field of disease prevention through multi-stakeholder initiatives to identify risk and protective factors, build community resilience and promote healthy behaviours through community engagement.
These multi-stakeholder practices, when combined with community-led efforts to prevent violent extremism, have the advantage of broadly including social workers, mental health workers, psychologists and other health workers who are increasingly becoming involved in efforts to reduce violence in communities.
Using a whole-of-society approach recognizes the social roots of the phenomenon of violent extremism and allows for early interventions and non-coercive solutions when individuals or communities are at risk by addressing the factors conducive to VERLT.
The identification of sustainable solutions for building resilience to VERLT also necessitates a shift from past security-led approaches towards a greater emphasis on community-based prevention.
P/CVERLT efforts therefore seek to mobilize and empower stakeholders not traditionally associated with national security.
In contrast to countering terrorism, which uses a repressive approach in dealing with the criminal space, P/CVERLT is non-coercive in nature and focuses on preventing and countering processes of radicalization that may lead to terrorism.
As P/CVERLT efforts are undertaken in the pre-criminal space, they do not involve prosecutions, arrests, or other repressive measures.
The aim of P/CVERLT is accordingly not to reach individuals who have already crossed into the criminal realm, i.e. planning or undertaking terrorist activity, but rather to build resilience among communities seen as potentially vulnerable to the appeal of violent extremism and to assist individuals willing to disengage from violent extremism and reintegrate into their communities.
P/CVERLT focuses on addressing and reducing grievances and structural social, economic, and political conditions that may be conducive to violent extremism.
Violent extremists often work towards inciting individual and collective hatred, promoting intolerance towards diversity, and creating societal divisions.
Therefore, supporting the development of resilient and socially cohesive communities can be the best defense against violent extremism from taking root.
In working together, communities can counter the corrosive appeal of violent extremism by promoting tolerance, mutual respect, pluralism, inclusion, and cohesion.
Ultimately, P/CVERLT efforts should center on the wellbeing and safety of communities and individuals.
P/CVERLT efforts entail a broad range of programming that can include, for example, awareness raising, capacity building, counter and alternative narrative messaging, targeted programs for schools, extracurricular activities (e.g., youth and sports clubs), mentoring by religious and community leaders, and individually tailored interventions organized by local public institutions and psycho-social service providers.
These activities can be categorized according to whether they pertain to prevention, intervention, or rehabilitation and reintegration.
Rationale behind local-level roundtables
In February 2018, the OSCE Mission to Skopje, in partnership with the British Embassy, facilitated two public consultation roundtables with local stakeholders to inform the drafting of the Government’s revised Strategies and Action Plans for Countering Violent Extremism (CVE) and Counterterrorism (CT), under the National Committee for Countering Violent Extremism and Counter-terrorism (NCCVECT).
This effort for a consultative drafting process was the first in the region of the Western Balkans and one of few such examples globally.
Following the adoption of the National Strategy, the Mission organized a series of roundtables with key local stakeholders in fall 2018 as part of a strategic communications campaign in support of the NCCVECT to disseminate the Strategy. With the participation of the National Coordinator’s Office, the roundtables served to enhance transparency and ensure consistency in strategy messaging at the local level.
The roundtables were organized in ten geographically dispersed municipalities: Chair (Skopje), Gostivar, Kichevo, Kumanovo, Prilep, Shtip, Struga, Strumica, Tetovo, and Veles.
In order to promote a multi-stakeholder, community-based approach to the implementation of the National Strategy and Action Plan, the roundtables sought to include the participation of representatives from the municipal administration, civil society, local institutions, educators, psycho-social care providers, youth, religious leaders and other influential members of the local community.
Objectives of the roundtables
In addition to raising awareness of local stakeholders of the risks of VERLT, the primary aim of the roundtables was to foster ownership and buy-in from local institutions, civil society and communities for implementing the National Strategy and Action Plan for CVE.
The roundtables also provided a crucial opportunity to assess the needs and priorities in each Municipality for adopting a multi-stakeholder approach to implementing the National Strategy and Action Plan in the local context.
With consideration given to the sensitivities surrounding P/CVERLT, the Mission’s whole-of-society approach aimed to achieve a number of outcomes from the roundtables, including
Promoting a holistic understanding of violent extremism that addresses the phenomenon in all forms (e.g., right wing, exclusivist nationalist, political), thus reducing the stigma of ethnic and religious communities and allowing for broadened discussions on what forms of violent extremism exist in the country and in the local context.
Supporting a shift from the traditional security-led approaches towards emphasizing a whole-of-society approach that serves to empower community stakeholders by treating them as key parts of the solution.
Providing a safe space and platform for dialogue for participants to voice their concerns openly and initiate confidence-building both between local communities and with government structures.
Empowering stakeholders to establish channels for enhanced communication and co-operation.
Identifying potential challenges and opportunities for a multi-stakeholder approach to the implementation of the Strategy and Action Plan.
Clarifying roles and responsibilities between the central and local government, and between government and civil society.
Collaboratively identifying findings and recommendations to serve as a preliminary basis for the future development of local action plans.
This report provides a summary overview of the local stakeholder-led discussions in the ten municipal roundtables.
The next section provides a description of the methodology of the roundtables, followed by the key findings and conclusions.
The final section elaborates recommended best practices drawn from the findings for implementing P/CVERLT programming.
An annex provides a detailed overview into the proceedings of the roundtables in Chair, Gostivar, Kumanovo, Struga, and Tetovo in the form of reports developed by the OSCE Mission to Skopje’s implementing partner, the Center for Research and Policy Making (CRPM).
As one of its main objectives, the report seeks to highlight the importance of promoting a multi-stakeholder approach to implementing the National Strategy for CVE with an understanding of a shared responsibility for security.
The roundtable findings also serve to demonstrate the benefit of ensuring an inclusive process in the conceptualization and design of policies and strategies on P/CVERLT, both at the national and local level.
The report is written for a broad audience, including policymakers and practitioners who are working to develop and implement P/CVERLT policies, strategies, action plans, and programmes.
It is also specifically written for local stakeholders – including municipal authorities and other local institutions, and local practitioners and professionals, as well as members of civil society — who might be involved in the design and implementation of P/CVERLT programmes.
Finally, the report is also intended to raise awareness of the importance of trustbased collaboration between policymakers and practitioners when developing and realizing these programmes.
2. METHODOLOGY OF THE ROUNDTABLES WITH LOCAL STAKEHOLDERS
The Mission based the methodology of the roundtables on the same whole-ofsociety approach it applied in designing and carrying out the public consultations for the drafting of the National Strategy for CVE in early 2018.
In pioneering an ambitious and inclusive approach to promoting multi-stakeholder engagement in P/CVERLT, the roundtable methodology provides a valuable example of best practices for policymakers and practitioners involved in designing similar public outreach processes for other national strategies.
The following section provides an overview of the methodological approach used in selecting the municipalities and participants for the roundtables, as well as designing the structure of the guided discussions.
This section also discusses the harm reduction strategies and confidence-building measures used by the Mission when conducting outreach to local stakeholders.
Selection of municipalities and participants for the roundtables
The Mission, in coordination with the NCCVECT, selected the ten municipalities based on a list of criteria that ensured geographical diversity and avoided stigmatizing certain minority ethnic communities that could create the public perception that only these communities struggle with the challenge of VERLT.
Furthermore, allowing for broad coverage of the country in organizing the roundtables also shifted focus away from areas where ongoing and planned P/ CVERLT activities were already highly concentrated and reinforced the message that all forms of VERLT would be addressed.
In identifying participants for the roundtables, the Mission relied on its field presence to conduct outreach to an extensive network of stakeholders among local self-government institutions, civil society, educators, youth, religious and local community leaders, all of which play an important role in the community based-approach that is the basis of P/CVERLT.
In many cases, the roundtables represented the first time when all the relevant local stakeholders were brought together in the same room as part of a dialogue.
Intensive groundwork was carried out through numerous preparatory meetings with stakeholders to identify appropriate participants and to address any concerns, including risks of stigmatization.
In acknowledging the general lack of public awareness and sensitivity around P/CVERLT, the Mission focused on identifying individuals who had prior experience with the subject matter or whose work was in a closely related field.
In identifying participants, the Mission took great care to ensure diverse representation of all ethnic and religious communities present in each municipal context.
Particular emphasis was placed on ensuring that the needs and perspectives of the smaller minority communities were reflected in the roundtable discussions.
Participants were also invited from local women’s and youth groups to further enrich the discussion and empower these groups in building coalitions within civil society and to increase co-operation with local institutions.
The design of the roundtables had to contend with P/CVERLT’s legacy of predominantly focusing on religiously-inspired forms of VERLT, which has resulted in the stigmatization of certain religious communities and strained relations between these communities on the one hand and institutions and law enforcement on the other.
Another result of this legacy is that religious leaders often perceive that they are expected to have all the solutions to preventing and countering VERLT, even when they lack the appropriate capacities, resources, and necessary support from other stakeholders.
A whole-of-society approach to P/CVERLT avoids defining VERLT as a theological issue and thus placing the burden of responsibility solely on religious leaders, and instead recognizes VERLT as a social phenomenon that situates religious leaders among a collective of stakeholders committed to building community resilience.
In preparation for the roundtables, religious leaders were encouraged to use the open forum to express both their ideas and concerns while engaging in dialogue with the other stakeholders present. Additionally, in order to support trust-building, the Mission conducted on-the-ground outreach to local representatives of religious communities to clearly explain the purpose of the roundtables and address their grievances, particularly regarding stigmatization.
The preparatory meetings provided the opportunity to emphasize a holistic understanding of P/CVERLT, which encompasses all forms of violent extremism and refrains from targeting any particular ethnic or religious group, in addition to promoting a whole-ofsociety approach.
The Mission also sought to include teachers and other educational support staff (e.g., school psychologists, pedagogues) in the roundtables, given their important role in directly influencing the worldviews and values of youth during a critical period in their lives for their cognitive development and identity formation.
Teachers are also well placed to intervene and support a young person who may be struggling with or vulnerable to negative social phenomena.
At the same time, P/CVERLT efforts in the region tend to focus on building the capacities of educators to recognize signs of radicalization, with the risk of doing harm in the absence of proper training, instead of empowering them with the right tools to build the resilience of youth to VERLT (e.g., by reforming teaching methodologies and placing greater emphasis in the curriculum on fostering critical thinking, respect for diversity, and the promotion of non-violent behaviors).
With this in mind, the Mission also invited representatives of the regional units of the Bureau for Development of Education that work on developing school curricula, in addition to local education officers from the religious institutions who also play an important role in youth development.
Drawing from best practice in the domain of public health prevention efforts, the Mission also invited psycho-social care providers to participate in the roundtables.
Professionals in the fields of social welfare and mental health have extensive experience from initiatives supporting vulnerable individuals at risk of engaging in other types of negative social behaviors, such as youth delinquency.
Additionally, psycho-social care providers are bound by a professional code of ethics that governs the client-provider relationship through principles such as trust and emphasis on supporting the individual’s wellbeing.
Whereas an oversecuritized approach toward P/CVERLT with significant involvement of law enforcement can result in displacing and alienating psycho-social care providers, a public health approach creates the space for their engagement.
The purpose of including psycho-social care providers was thus to raise their awareness of VERLT and the important contribution they can make in bolstering protective factors.
Central to a do-no-harm approach in relation to VERLT is a nuanced understanding of community dynamics and sensitivities.
Given the sensitive nature of P/CVERLT, the Mission took into consideration the existing mistrust expressed by communities – especially minority ethnic communities -- towards institutions and law enforcement. Often in engagement efforts between police and the public, there is a perception that the security-driven agendas of law enforcement tend to displace other important local community concerns and grievances, especially when the interaction is one-way in nature.
Given the existing taboos around VERLT and the associated fears of negative repercussions from discussing the issue in the presence of law enforcement, the Mission prioritized the roundtables as a safe space for all participants to share their views on local problems and grievances.
Consequently, representatives of the police were not invited to the roundtables in order to ensure an open forum for discussion and to strengthen an understanding of P/CVERLT as a communitybased, multi-stakeholder effort carried out in a pre-criminal space.
This approach aimed to allow the community to feel engaged for their own benefit and that they too have an important stake in contributing to the security and wellbeing of their community.
Structure of the roundtables
Recognizing the taboos around VERLT and the general lack of public awareness in this area as of fall 2018, the Mission opted to structure the roundtables as fullday events to allow enough time for discussion to develop in sufficient depth.
Each roundtable accordingly began with an overview of key concepts and terminology to ensure that participants had a common understanding for the subsequent discussion sessions.
This conceptual session was then followed by a presentation of the National Strategy for CVE, led by the National Coordinator or his Deputy for CVE.
The active participation of the NCCVECT throughout the roundtables resulted in dynamic interaction between the central and local level by directly answering the queries of participants, as well as hearing first-hand their perspectives, grievances, and ideas for solutions.
The discussion sessions were organized around key intersectional areas and facilitated by an experienced moderator with the support of guiding questions prepared in advance of the roundtables.
Each of the thematic sessions allowed participants from all backgrounds to contribute to identifying local challenges and opportunities related to the implementation of the Strategy and Action Plan in the local context.
Participants were informed that the “Chatham House Rule” would be applied in order to protect their identity and allow for an open discussion.
The roundtable sessions were organized around the following themes
Violent extremism in the local context.
Empowering civil society and sharing best practices.
Engagement between the municipality and community.
Building trust between communities and law enforcement.
The role of communities in the prevention of violent extremism.
Education and supporting at-risk youth.
The importance of social welfare and mental health.
Taking into account the sensitivity of discussing violent extremism with local communities, the Mission placed considerable emphasis on selecting moderators and rapporteurs with appropriate skills and abilities.
An additional consideration in identifying moderators and rapporteurs was building civil society capacity in the field of P/CVERLT to continue working on long-term policy change.
Consequently, the Mission identified CRPM, a leading policy think tank that was carrying out research, together with the International Organization for Migration (IOM), in municipalities overlapping with those selected for the roundtables to assess local institutional capacities to implement the National Strategy.
By promoting synergies among initiatives, the Mission aimed to ensure that the research and roundtable discussions built upon each other for assisting the government, the local institutions and the civil society to create the best possible multi-stakeholder approach to P/CVERLT.
3. FINDINGS
This section provides an overview of the findings of the roundtables. Organized according to the structure of the sessions in most of the roundtables, the findings in each thematic area are complemented with attention to local specifics of particular interest.
3.1. Violent extremism in the local context
Taken together, the roundtables suggested that awareness of VERLT is generally low, and most roundtable participants took the position that violent extremism is not widespread in their municipality, though the issue of local citizens going to fight in Syria was raised in several roundtables.
Additionally, there was generally a high level of awareness that while violent extremism may start small, it can also grow quickly in the presence of visible examples/ role models.
It was also noted that discussion of VERLT is treated as a taboo, with the stifling effect on such discussion counterproductive from the standpoint of preventing violent extremism.
Participants also noted that violent extremism is most often associated with religious manifestations, resulting in the stigmatization of some communities, and identified right wing and nationalist extremism as also being prevalent in the country.
Notwithstanding the position of most roundtable participants that violent extremism is not widespread, the roundtables yielded evidence of the recognition of a fairly wide range of manifestations of the phenomenon.
On one end of the spectrum, roundtable participants mentioned graffiti expressing insults and violent intentions and/or ideas as a low-intensity form of violent extremism, with participants at the roundtable in Prilep noting also that the failure to remove such graffiti contributes to the normalization of such messages.
The roots of intolerance and hate first also manifest as verbal confrontations before escalating to physical violence, including most notably fights on inter-ethnic basis among secondary school students at schools and on public transportation.
Where hate speech and physical violence by sports (usually football) fan groups are concerned, the roundtables revealed widespread recognition of such activity as a form of violent extremism with participants in Chair noting alleged influence from political parties.
In Prilep, participants identified the burning of the Charshi Mosque and the effective expulsion of ethnic Albanian families in 2001 as an extreme manifestation of VERLT.
Discussion of the factors potentially conducive of VERLT pointed to the prominence of family-related concerns.
Common among roundtable participants was the view that the internal cohesion of families is not as strong as it once was, leading youth to seek identity and belonging in other kinds of groups, such as ethnic communities, political parties, religious communities, and sports fan groups.
In some roundtables, participants referred also to the absence of parents, often as a result of labor migration stemming from high unemployment.
At the roundtable in Chair, participants related the absence of a parent to increased vulnerability to extremist preachers.
Various issues of gender also received mention, including domestic violence, lack of respect for women in general, and, in Veles, conservative values preventing mothers from attending meetings in school.
In addition to family dynamics, roundtable participants identified a range of other causes of VERLT.
As mentioned above in relation to labor migration, economic conditions were frequently cited as a condition conducive to violent extremism.
As one participant in the roundtable in Veles put it, „We wouldn‘t be discussing these problems if [the living standard] were higher.“
Sometimes mentioned by roundtable participants in combination with poverty and unemployment was marginalization on ethnic and/or religious grounds.
Ethnic and religious marginalization was explained as a factor potentially influencing an individual’s search for identity and belonging in such a way as to make violent extremist groups more attractive.
Additionally, it was noted that some marginalized segments of society may seeks support from alternative religious groups outside of official religious institutions out of a perception that these groups are closer to the people and their needs.
Another type of cause identified in the roundtables relates to access to information.
As noted by roundtable participants, media often play a destructive role by spreading hate speech and playing up interethnic tensions in the way they cover incidents where the perpetrator is a member of a minority group.
Youth’s often unregulated access to mobile phones received frequent mention, and the hate speech common in media and social media was identified as a push factor toward violent extremism.
Also receiving frequent mention in the roundtables was the politicization of life and institutions in North Macedonia, sometimes in the form of incitement to extremism by political parties in power and by parties’ youth wings.
The storming of parliament on 27 April 2017 was mentioned in several roundtables as an example of political party involvement in violent extremism.
In Gostivar, participants pointed out that one extreme leads to another, especially where a culture of violence is normalized and politics is focused on hatred and/or revenge.
High levels of political polarization impede the functioning of institutions, leading in turn to a lack of public trust in those same institutions.
3.2. Empowering civil society and sharing best practices
Discussion of civil society in the roundtables pointed both to widespread recognition of civil society’s potential role in identifying and taking preventive action against various forms of violent extremism.
A wide range of variation across localities in civil society’s strength and relations with local communities and institutions was also noted.
While more capacity building on P/CVERLT is needed, participants also assessed that CSOs already have extensive experience in areas related to violence prevention and building social cohesion that could be better supported.
At the same time, participants urged caution towards involving CSOs that lack the appropriate expertise on P/CVERLT and suggested that more effort should be made to facilitate the sharing of best practices.
Participants also identified several areas in which CSOs can increase the focus of their activities in P/CVERLT, such as engaging parents in violence prevention, promoting human rights through nonformal education, and providing training to media organizations on conflict sensitivity in their reporting.
During the roundtable discussions, participants provided numerous examples of positive contributions by local CSOs to the prevention of violent extremism.
In Gostivar CSOs have been implementing various projects to build resilience within the local community, with relevant projects including digital skills training for marginalized youth and the opening of a youth center, as well as other initiatives focused on bringing together youth from diverse backgrounds.
As explained by roundtable participants, good relations between civil society and local government also led to the establishment in Gostivar of the country’s first municipal youth council; however it was noted that the youth council faces challenges with insufficient funding for activities.
Some CSOs in Kumanovo have not only taken a public stand against violent extremism, but also undertaken preventive work with youth susceptible to joining violent extremist groups abroad.
Additionally, the roundtables in Prilep and Tetovo revealed civil society capacity built in providing assistance to vulnerable individuals that could potentially be applied in relation to preventing violent extremism.
At the same time, participants at the roundtables in Kumanovo and Prilep noted that CSOs struggle to sustain long-term programming due to a lack of funds, with the discussion in Kumanovo identifying the need for donors to take local priorities and existing programming into account in allocating their funding.
Participants at the roundtable in Kumanovo also noted that while local civil society is relatively strong in its own right, co-operation between CSOs, schools, and municipal authorities needs strengthening.
Moreover, even in Gostivar, where roundtable participants assessed the position and role of civil society positively, it was noted that civil society had suffered in the past from pressure exerted by the state through politically targeted audits and inspections.
While the roundtable discussions in several municipalities yielded insight into the strengths of local civil society to prevent violent extremism, the roundtables in Chair and Struga showed a less positive situation.
In these municipalities, co-operation between civil society and local institutions is characterized as weak, with low levels of trust and awareness about local CSO programming on the part of local authorities.
Participants in the roundtables in Chair and Struga also made note of negative public perceptions of CSOs in these municipalities as being influenced by personal, political, and/or criminal agendas that effectively undermine the idea of volunteerism and civic activism.
Additional findings from the roundtable in Chair include low levels of awareness on the part of CSOs about the availability of municipal premises for their activities, as well as difficulties experienced by CSOs in obtaining funding from the municipality.
Finally, participants at the roundtable in Chair pointed out that most locally active CSOs are humanitarian, with few organizations implementing cultural activities or activities designed to raise civic awareness and engagement.
Concern was also raised by religious communities that some foreign funded humanitarian organizations were allegedly carrying out activities with political or religious undertones and non-transparent motivations.
3.3. Engagement between the municipality and community
The findings of the roundtables suggest that levels of engagement between municipality and community vary widely in much the same way as the strength and role of civil society at the local level, as discussed above.
The provisions for coordination between municipality and community receiving most frequent mention at the roundtables were neighbourhood-level administrative units (mesni zaednici) and Local Prevention Councils (LPCs).
With regard to the former, participants in the roundtables in Kumanovo and Tetovo lamented the loss of neighbourhood-level administrative units’ status in 2002, as a result these units no longer have access to a bank account, official stamp or seal.
They described the units as an important and often effective mechanism for engagement between local authorities and local communities due to their overview of grassroots-level developments, but said the units encounter difficulties in resolving community issues because they function since 2002 on a voluntary basis.
Participants therefore urged that a new law be passed to reinstate the status of the local neighborhood units.
Where LPCs are concerned, the roundtables made clear that these mechanisms have the potential to serve as a municipality-led tool for ensuring that all stakeholders are included in discussing issues of public safety.
However, the absence of a legal requirement for all municipalities to establish LPCs, in addition to other challenges for multi-agency cooperation, has prevented the establishment and continued function of such a body in all of the municipalities in which the roundtables were held.
In Kumanovo, an LPC exists, but was characterized by roundtable participants as hardly functional as a result of appointments made on the basis of political affiliation rather than expertise.
Participants in other roundtables referred to the LPCs in their respective municipalities as inactive or never established, while participants in Prilep stated that were an LPC to be established in the future, it would be important to ensure broader focus than only VERLT.
Furthermore, participants suggested that LPCs should ensure that individuals with the appropriate competencies and commitment be included as permanent members to ensure consistency and sustainability.
In addition to different institutions, participants also proposed that representatives of CSOs and communities be included in the LPC configuration.
In the absence of a functioning LPC or other mechanisms that can be used for preventing violent extremism, the roundtables held in Gostivar and Kumanovo provided insight into existing and planned coordination bodies for addressing other types anti-social and violent phenomena.
In Gostivar, where participants made note of relevant, but unfunded, mechanisms for coordination (e.g., a coordination body for the prevention of gender-based violence) and also called on the municipality to take violent extremism more seriously, they also welcomed the signing of a memorandum of understanding with the CSO Search for Common Ground to establish a Community Action Team that will work on a local action plan for CVE and will advise the Municipal Council on related matters.
Community Action Teams have also been established in the municipalities of Chair and Kichevo.
At the same time, participants in this roundtable noted that many of the problems faced by the municipality need to be addressed at the central level.
In Kichevo, participants requested that representatives of smaller minority communities and from rural settlements be included in any coordinative body working on P/CVERLT to contribute towards identifying issues and solutions.
In Kumanovo, information on issues of public concern is shared among neighbourhood units, the Committee for Inter-Community Relations (CICR), and the security committee of the municipal council, with the sources protected.
In both Kumanovo and Kichevo, participants noted that although a Committee for Inter-Community Relations has been established, its voluntary character has made it difficult to address issues in a preventive manner, in addition to organize the annual meeting for drafting a program to be implemented by the Municipality’s cultural section.
Additionally, while the Municipality in Kumanovo maintains good relations with local religious organizations, there is no inter-religious body and generally little co-operation between religious communities.
More worrying, according to roundtable participants, is the lack of trust in institutions on the part of citizens, particularly among the more vulnerable segments of society, which often prevents them from receiving needed assistance.
Whereas the roundtables in Gostivar and Kumanovo yielded evidence of functional provisions for coordination between municipality and community in the prevention of violent extremism, discussion at the roundtables in Chair, Prilep, Tetovo, and Struga focused on the absence of such provisions.
At the roundtable in Chair, participants noted a lack of dialogue and co-operation between local communities and the municipality while pointing to the potential for the municipality to initiate community engagement through joint activities in the sphere of culture.
In Prilep, roundtable participants presented the now-defunct youth council for juvenile delinquency as an example of good practice for bringing together parents’ councils, education representatives, and providers of psycho-social services.
However, they also conveyed the perception that local authorities have avoided contact with the Islamic Religious Community (IRC) since the IRC requested the restoration of the Charshi Mosque.
Participants at the roundtable in Struga characterized the non-functioning of the LPC as symptomatic of a broader lack of inter-sectoral co-operation in the Municipality, also pointing to challenges in accessing and addressing the needs of the rural communities surrounding the town of Struga.
Finally, a barrier to engagement between municipality and community identified by participants of the roundtable in Tetovo was the municipality’s financial difficulties, including most notably the blocking of its bank account for several years.
3.4. Building trust between communities and law enforcement
Overall, the roundtables made clear that trust between communities and law enforcement is lacking for a number of different reasons.
In Struga and Tetovo, for example, participants attributed low levels of trust in law enforcement to the ineffectiveness of police in enforcing the law when the perpetrators of crimes are believed to be politically connected.
As explained by participants at the roundtable in Struga, the perceived inconsistent application of the law by police provides impunity for well-known local criminals, effectively promoting a life of crime as a viable option for youth.
In Tetovo and Chair, citizens are also afraid to report their concerns directly to the police for fear of retaliation from the perpetrators, and would prefer anonymous reporting.
The low representation of ethnic Albanians in various organs of the Ministry of Interior was also mentioned as a factor in the trust deficit, despite the existence of affirmative action for the equitable representation of ethnic communities in the police.
The recruitment of law enforcement officials on the basis of political party affiliation was mentioned in Chair and Kumanovo as a cause of low levels of citizen trust in law enforcement.
Widespread lack of trust in police was evident also in roundtable participants’ views expressed on the appropriate role of law enforcement in the prevention of violent extremism.
Participants in Chair, Kumanovo, and Tetovo conveyed fears of stigmatization and of being implicated by police in unnecessary investigations, with participants in Chair warning that disproportionate repressive measures targeting the local community risk creating fertile ground for the spread of VERLT.
Roundtable participants in Struga, on the other hand, expressed concerns about the capacity of police to deal with issues of prevention in addition to their existing caseload.
Reflecting these concerns, roundtable participants explained that police should be engaged only as a last resort or if there is an imminent threat to public safety.
Participants in Chair explained that community-based initiatives for preventing violent extremism in their municipality have made a point of not involving law enforcement officials for fear of doing harm, while participants in Gostivar emphasized that the strategic plan to be developed by the Community Action Team for prevention of violent extremism should avoid reliance on the police.
At the same time, participants called for more trust-building between communities and the police through an open forum as a mechanism to share their community safety concerns; however, they noted that the police work from a highly centralized level which poses challenges to being able to address concerns raised in a timely manner.
Taking into account low levels of community trust in law enforcement, the roundtables also probed co-operation between law enforcement on the one hand and schools and centers for social work on the other.
While such cooperation generally received low marks from roundtable participants and most took the view that cases of youth delinquency should first be handled internally by school-based psycho-social support staff rather than involving police, roundtable participants in Strumica and Veles made note of good cooperation between police and schools.
Finally, notwithstanding roundtable participants’ predominantly negative views of the role of police in relation to preventing violent extremism, participants in some roundtables recalled previous community policing practices, such as patrolman (pozornikar9), in positive terms and pointed to their potential role in preventing violent extremism by maintaining contacts at grassroots level.
3.5. The role of communities in the prevention of violent extremism
Discussion of the role of communities in preventing violent extremism focused in large part on families and religious communities, with many roundtable participants voicing that the prevention of violent extremism begins at home and in early childhood development.
In several roundtables, participants emphasized that the focus should be on strengthening the family unit given it is the source for developing values of inter-religious and inter-ethnic tolerance.
Violence in the family should also be addressed to counter the normalization of violence in society more broadly.
Statements like these were often followed by observations about the potential for school-based parent councils to take an active role in raising awareness of the risks associated with violent extremism.
Moreover, parents should become more informed about their role in monitoring their child’s activity on the internet and ensuring their protection from online risks, including from content related to VERLT.
At the roundtable in Chair, participants spoke about the important role of women in preventing VERLT, noting that they can take the lead in their families to foster positive inter-religious and inter-ethnic relations, both proactively and in response to fights among youth at school and on public transport.
In this regard, the project “Mothers Schools” of the CSO Women without Borders received recognition from roundtable participants in Chair for empowering women to lead their families and communities in building resilience against VERLT.
In terms of dialogue and co-operation between religious communities, participants highlighted that on a higher level, the heads of religious communities meet twice a year to discuss activities, but at the local level there is insufficient communication between the Islamic Religious Community (IRC) and the Macedonian Orthodox Church (MOC).
Intensified co-operation is needed to foster tolerance, for example by engaging in joint activities of mutual interest (e.g. cleaning the litter in a park) at the local level.
Participants at the roundtable in Kumanovo singled out as an example of good practice the forum for religious leaders organized after the violent incidents in May 2015 to discuss how best to prevent further escalation of the situation.
Also common were calls from representatives of both the IRC and the MOC for the incorporation of ethics and religion classes in school curricula, taught by appropriately qualified teachers, to promote ethics and religious tolerance.
The roundtable discussions also examined the relationship between the construction of religious spaces of worship and symbolic objects on the one hand and interethnic and inter-religious relations on the other.
Whereas in most cases this relationship was described in terms of how the construction of religious buildings can provoke inter-communal tensions, the discussion in Struga also highlighted how religious leaders played a constructive role in preventing an escalation to violence in the village of Oktisi over the construction of a church without a permit.
From a different perspective, participants explained that some religious communities have longstanding grievances that should be addressed.
Mentioned in the roundtables in both Prilep and Gostivar, the failure of local authorities to restore the burned down Charshi Mosque in Prilep from the 2001 conflict has prevented true reconciliation between ethnic and religious communities.
As a result, there remains considerable need for work on inter-religious dialogue in that municipality.
At the roundtable in Gostivar, the low level of communication between religious communities and local institutions was explained in terms of the legacy of communism and its propagation of anti-religious views.
Beyond references to specific religious communities, participants in some roundtables called for greater transparency and regulation within religious institutions in general; as one participant in the roundtable in Veles put it, “We can’t know what the priest and the imam say.
We need to see what they’re preaching.”
In addition, MOC representatives participating in one of the roundtables pointed to cases in which individuals espousing extreme beliefs seek to manipulate national and religious identities, noting that some priests and members of the Church have an ideological approach and are difficult to keep under control.
Among the concerns raised at the roundtables in relation to Muslim communities in North Macedonia, the most common related to the challenges for IRC of addressing the misuse of religion in such a way as to prevent VERLT.
At several roundtables, representatives of IRC spoke of foreign and/ or “extremist” organizations that carry out religious activities outside the control of official religious bodies, sometimes under the guise of cultural and humanitarian activities.
Participants at the roundtables in Gostivar and Struga also noted that their reports to police about such practices have not led to action.
In Gostivar, roundtable participants further made note of the circulation of large quantities of religious literature without IRC oversight, arguing that VERLT can be prevented by increasing religious literacy and promoting a strong grounding in the Hanafi tradition officially followed in the country.
Similarly, participants at the roundtable in Gostivar suggested that religious leaders should raise their profile on online social media to reduce the influence of extremist preachers among youth and offer alternative narratives.
Furthermore, participant sin Kumanovo emphasized that religious leaders should consider how they can better engage youth to understand the modern challenges and realities that they face.
While much of the discussion on communities focused on religious communities, some roundtable participants attended also to broader macrosocial phenomena, such as hooliganism among sports fans groups and incitement to violence by youth wings of political parties.
Participants at the roundtable in Chair identified the culture of violence in some sports fan groups as springboards to political and religious extremism, on the one hand pointing to a special relationship between such groups and political parties, and on the other hand alleging that several known foreign terrorist fighters who left North Macedonia to fight in Syria and Ukraine had previously been part of sports fan groups.
In Tetovo and Kumanovo, participants emphasized that working with football clubs and their fan groups should be a top priority to prevent the use of hate speech and nationalistic violent extremism.
In the view of participants in Chair, a special body should be created to regulate sports fans groups and sanction them for misconduct.
They also called on all types of community stakeholders to collectively condemn violence and hate perpetrated by sports fan groups.
In this regard, participants in Chair shared that the MOC had attempted to establish contact out to a well-known sports fan group in Skopje, known for inciting violent incidents based on ethnic and religious intolerance, in order to promote positive moral values.
Participants in the majority of the roundtables expressed concern that political parties spread extremism and nationalist rhetoric that creates polarization in society.
In regards to youth wings of political parties, participants in Prilep voiced that they can potentially play a constructive role in preventing their members from propagating negative narratives, hate speech and violence.
Participants in both Struga and Kichevo noted incidents of violence had occurred in the past between youth in schools incited by political parties during election periods.
Finally, participants at the roundtable in Kumanovo noted that the local community at large struggles to prevent hate speech in social media and to dispel fake news from having a detrimental impact on society.
3.6. Education and supporting at-risk youth
Roundtable participants identified various challenges faced by youth that contribute to their vulnerability to violent extremism.
At several of the roundtables, participants referred to pessimism and demoralization resulting from not only from a lack of direct opportunities, but also from the absence of positive role models in a society in which success apparently comes from personal connections rather than from skills, experience, and integrity.
In this situation, participants noted that youth may seek a sense of belonging by engaging in extreme outlets; therefore youth need opportunities for positive mentorship and to gain leadership skills to make meaningful contributions to society.
In support of the thesis that youth need to feel understood and that they belong to their communities, participants at the roundtable in Kumanovo recalled the case of a girl who left for (and was eventually killed in) Syria because she felt deeply marginalized when she decided to express her religiosity openly.
On a more positive note, participants at the roundtable in Gostivar spoke of the youth council and center established in that municipality as promising mechanisms for addressing some of the challenges faced by at-risk youth.
The roundtables revealed major shortcomings in the operation of the education system in North Macedonia which greatly reduce the system’s ability to provide viable alternatives for at-risk youth.
One of the prominent findings of the roundtables is that VERLT among youth in North Macedonia feeds on deep societal cleavages as reflected in the education system.
In the first place, segregation by language of instruction limits contacts among pupils from different ethnic – and, in many cases, also religious – communities.
Participants at the roundtable in Tetovo further attributed the current situation of segregation to the inability of relevant institutions to handle the renaming of schools in ways that would not create “winners and losers”.
Moreover, in most schools, little is done to promote multiculturalism among students, and some textbooks contain offensive and nationalist-oriented material that contributes to polarization and marginalization, particularly in relation to ethnic minorities.
Finally, participants at the roundtables in Chair, Kumanovo, and Prilep expressed concerns about the effects on students of extremist views held by teachers, with participants in Chair citing a concrete case in which a member of teaching staff had incited violent extremism in the classroom.
By way of contrast, a participant in the roundtable in Shtip cited the example of a local primary school in which good interethnic relations are cultivated actively and friendships across ethnic lines have proven effective in preventing VERLT.
In several roundtables, participants made reference to manifestations of political polarization in the school system.
Some participants observed that the tendency for teachers to be employed on the basis of political affiliation makes for considerable unevenness in the level of skills among teaching staff.
This tendency places teachers in a difficult position to communicate to school management what is needed to increase the quality of education, compounding the overburdening of teachers that comes with large class sizes and which prevents individual work with students, especially at-risk youth.
Perhaps more troubling are the cases reported by roundtable participants in which well-connected teachers and students brought weapons onto school premises and issued threats to teachers and/or students, contributing to normalization of a culture of violence.
Taking into account the phenomena described in the preceding paragraphs, there is perhaps nothing surprising in the finding of research cited by roundtable participants in Prilep that students lack trust in and are therefore tend to be unwilling to share their concerns with teachers and school support services.
Nonetheless, participants at the roundtables in Chair and Kumanovo provided accounts of good practice in providing support to at-risk youth.
In Chair, when a child displays deviant behavior, the child’s teacher invites the parents to discuss together with a pedagogue and school psychologist.
In Kumanovo, roundtable participants reported excellent co-operation between school professional services and local CSOs.
Roundtable participants highly agreed on the value of extracurricular activities for providing youth with access to constructive free-time activities.
At the same time, however, participants noted that widespread overcrowding of schools that leads to operation in two or more shifts means that many schools lack the space in which to offer extracurricular activities, even if they are planned in the school program.
It was also mentioned in the roundtables that the most vulnerable students are also most likely to be excluded from such activities, as priority is often given to better-performing students.
In Gostivar and Tetovo, municipal authorities have taken steps to address this situation by allocating resources for extracurricular activities: the youth and community center in Gostivar brings together six youth organizations, while the municipality of Tetovo has provided space and logistical support to a recently created network of youth volunteers who serve as hosts for activities.
A topic arousing some debate among roundtable participants was the potential for local councils for prevention of juvenile delinquency to play a role in preventing violent extremism.
Participants in Tetovo and Veles were generally positive about this, while a participant in Shtip took the position that such councils are not appropriate for addressing VERLT.
It was also mentioned in the roundtables that the youth organizations of political parties need to be engaged in efforts to prevent violent extremism.
3.7. Social welfare and mental health
Given that potential drivers for VERLT include social marginalization and chronic unemployment, the roundtable discussions also explored measures taken by social welfare institutions to address these phenomena, in particular how they impact youth.
Additionally, it was pointed out that measures for addressing unemployment tend to focus on persons with completed secondary or higher education, leaving out traditionally marginalized groups such as Roma.
A common observation of roundtable participants is that while centers for social work have extensive experience addressing different forms of antisocial behaviours, they lack specialized expertise on understanding violent extremism and its associated risks.
Furthermore, social work centers lack the resources necessary to develop and deploy relevant capacity, with participants in Kumanovo noting that employees of the local center were already working on a voluntary basis to implement existing programming.
One suggestion was for a centralized center with a pool of mobile experts to be established to advise practitioners at the local level.
The roundtables also highlighted the need for social work centers to work more closely with elementary and secondary schools to provide support to vulnerable youth.
In light of the fact that most teachers lack the time and skills necessary to actively support students’ social development, the role of schoolbased psycho-social support staff takes on particular importance.
However, political polarization and overcrowding in schools generally affect this category of staff in much the same way that teaching staff are affected, with many school populations too large for the number of psycho-social support staff employed and some schools lacking a pedagogue and/or a psychologist.
Even where such staff exist in sufficient number, they often lack training for understanding the phenomenon of radicalization to violent extremism and how it can be addressed.
Participants noted that it is important for youth to feel listened to, to be able to express themselves, and to feel they can identify their problems and concerns to trusted adults.
Therefore, teachers, pedagogues, school psychologists and parents need to become more involved in better engaging youth.
In addressing youth delinquency and violent behaviour, participants also urged that such cases first be handled internally by a school’s pedagogues and psychologists instead of prematurely involving the police.
Furthermore, it was proposed that specialized programs should be created for youth to deconstruct the normalized culture of violence and aid in processing global news and events that may be disturbing to the psyche of young people.
Participants also noted that social work centers should concentrate more on addressing family dysfunctionality, as family violence can further encourage violent and extremist behavior of young individuals.
Such efforts would also support the work of psycho-social support staff in schools who under recent legislation have been prevented from accessing information on the family background of students despite substantial evidence that a large proportion of students requiring support come from socially disadvantaged and/or dysfunctional families.
Some roundtable participants also observed that centers for social work are not always willing to assist school-based psychosocial support staff when contacted about a particular student.
Participants also identified that local social work centers should be engaged in implementing programs for rehabilitation and reintegration of referred individuals assessed as vulnerable to VERLT.
The roundtable in Struga also pointed to the absence of knowledge on how individuals being released from the prison system can be properly resocialized and reintegrated into communities with adequate support to ensure that they do not become vulnerable to violent extremist groups.
In some roundtables it was suggested that religious leaders can play a role in providing mentorship on a theological basis during rehabilitation and reintegration, although they often lack more specialized training in providing psychological support and counselling.
Finally, the roundtables highlighted that social and cultural taboos around mental health leads to stigmatization and additional barriers for individuals to access mental health support services in the community.
4. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
This section provides conclusions, combined with a few recommendations, on issues that were identified as challenges during the discussions.
They are synthesized from the findings in each thematic area and provide guidance on how to promote a multi-stakeholder approach to P/CVERLT.
4.1. Capacities for a whole-of-society approach to P/CVERLT (trained staff; infrastructure; finances)
4.1.1. Adequately trained staff
The whole-of-society approach to P/CVERLT was supported in all of the roundtables organized.
However, one of the main challenges identified during the discussions was the lack of training to ensure understanding and awareness of principles and approaches promoted by the central government through national strategies and action plans.
Stakeholders agreed this was a systemic deficiency appearing during coordination with their mother institutions, and noted that this deficiency is particularly apparent where no institution has been tasked with taking the lead in addressing crosscutting issues.
The participants raised concerns regarding the involvement of teachers in P/CVERLT.
A general perception of the educators in all areas was that they consider themselves inadequate to engage in prevention unless they possess a certain level of expertise.
Specialized training of educators was prioritized at almost every roundtable.
The recommendation arising from these concerns was that special attention should be given to ensure that P/CVERLT interventions respect human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the rights of children.
In most roundtables, CSO representatives repeatedly brought to the attention of educators and others that existing skillsets can be applied to prevention programming.
These skills may include (but need not be limited to) mentorship and counselling, pedagogical support, active or strategic listening, communication skills, mediation, and critical thinking.
As a result, participants in most roundtables displayed a change of perceptions regarding their abilities to engage in P/CVERLT after the initial discussions, as their awareness increased on existing skills that can be used.
At the same time, if the training of teachers is not adequate and in line with human rights and a do-no-harm approach, there is a risk that it could result in oversimplification of key issues.
Social workers and psychologists requested respect for the autonomy of their professional fields.
While expressing willingness to participate in prevention programming, participants in these categories emphasized the need to resist requests from law enforcement agencies to break the ethical codes that ensure trust from the beneficiaries of psychosocial support.
In some municipalities, social workers and psychologists participating in the roundtables presented successful inter-institutional co-operation in preventing other anti-social behaviours, such as juvenile delinquency.
In the opinion of these participants, capacities of professional staff need to be increased and a thorough understanding of P/CVERLT concepts provided through specialized training.
Representatives of municipalities and local institutions requested specialized training be provided by the central-level authorities and the National Committee for Countering Violent Extremism and Counter-terrorism (NCCVECT).
More specifically, each of the ministries represented in the NCCVECT should provide training at the local level before attempting to create local implementation plans on P/CVERLT.
The high turnover of staff in some institutions hinders the sustainability of capacity building, as well as of preventive mechanisms that could be established on the local level.
Participants also recommended that an assessment of compatibility should be conducted for anyone who wants to be involved in P/CVERLT interventions, as some professionals in their field may express views supportive of or conducive to VERLT.
4.1.2. Infrastructure
The latest global trends demonstrate that communities have a crucial role to play in the prevention of violent extremism, with community-based approaches to prevention proving beneficial in supplementing the law-enforcement approach to security.
The biggest challenge identified by communities was the lack of infrastructure, whether physical or soft (i.e., institutions), for providing a space and forum for communities to contribute to prevention.
Even though all participants agreed that governments cannot prevent and counter violent extremism alone, communities requested that national strategies reflect the need to build physical and soft infrastructure for P/CVERLT.
Roundtable participants pointed to the limited extra-curricular funds of schools and a systemic lack of space.
They also noted a shortage of psychologists despite repeated requests.
On the other hand, some municipal authorities have informally designated places for work with youth or community outreach.
There was broad agreement among roundtable participants that partnerships for preventing VERLT are best formed by communities themselves, with support from institutions and civil society organizations.
However, there remains a need for central and local authorities to coordinate community efforts by creating an infrastructure to support the work of communities, local institutions and civil society organizations.
The local institutions acknowledged that there are ambiguities in defining the roles of stakeholders in prevention.
One of the biggest concerns is the lack of recognition of prevention as a general competence, whether by municipalities that have competence over schools, or by social and healthcare facilities or other institutions.
In order to promote a multi-sector approach, channels of communication and co-operation need to be established.
Most local institutions are restricted in their interactions by their mother institutions at the central level and do not give legitimacy to requests from other institutions, resulting in action taken only when requested by the mother institution or other central authorities.
4.1.3. Finances
One of the main concerns expressed by stakeholders participating in the roundtables was that they lack finances to engage in P/CVERLT activities or interventions.
The institutional stakeholders reported that they lack flexibility in their budgets that are pre-determined by their mother institutions.
Community and religious leaders, on the other hand, lack resources and capacity to manage funds.
For their part, municipal representatives noted that they could find modalities to fund P/CVERLT interventions, but the funds would be limited and would be taken from funds for other obligations of the municipality.
On the other hand, the CSOs dealing with P/CVERLT or related issues stated that finances were not their biggest concern, pointing instead to the need for more institutional support and capacity building training.
Throughout the roundtables, the National Coordinator on CVE and CT and the two Deputy Coordinators reassured stakeholders that donors are interested to fund local initiatives.
At the same time, they specified that in order to get funds, a local implementation plan should be developed in accordance with the National Strategy on CVE.
In several municipalities, requests were made that donors consult with communities on needs and priorities prior to planning interventions.
4.2. Inter-agency co-operation
The most difficult segment to address in promoting a multi-stakeholder approach is inter-agency co-operation.
While such co-operation is difficult in any thematic area, in the case of P/CVERLT it is made more challenging by a legacy of securitization.
Particularly in municipalities where no P/ CVERLT initiatives had been implemented, local institutions were struggling to understand their role in addressing violent extremism when contacted during preparation of the roundtables.
As a result, the roundtables served as an excellent forum for debate, raising awareness, breaking taboos about securitized topics, and promoting co-operation and community inclusiveness.
At the roundtables, good practices and lessons learned were shared in regards to multi-stakeholder bodies formed to address various issues.
Generally, institutions did not have any criteria for delegating or appointing appropriate staff to such committees or bodies.
Additionally, the inadequate expertise of members undermined the credibility and the functioning of such efforts.
This situation was exacerbated by political polarization within relevant institutions, as experts in their field were not promoted to work in multistakeholder bodies because other individuals have been politically appointed.
The lack of a hierarchy and reporting lines for the work of the multi-stakeholder bodies resulted in no accountability for actions to be taken.
Members of such bodies reported not receiving support from their managers, who failed to recognize the bodies’ competence in prevention, as well as the legitimacy of the conclusions and decisions issued by such bodies.
The lack of incentives such as financial compensation for regular participation in the bodies’ work was also identified as detrimental for multi-stakeholder bodies.
Justification for absence from work was also mentioned as an issue leading to problems in coordination for meetings.
Vertical and horizontal co-operation is lacking in various areas relating to P/CVERLT. Roundtable participants noted that local institutions generally work in isolated silos in the municipalities.
As a result, representatives of these institutions are often not aware of the activities of others and overlap in issues or work with the same stakeholders.
In light of this situation, a multistakeholder approach can be expected to increase awareness and co operation.
To date, various multi-stakeholder bodies had been formed in the selected municipalities for prevention against specific categories of anti-social behaviours such as juvenile delinquency and alcohol- or drug-related harm.
Local Prevention Councils and Citizen Advisory Groups, initially promoted by the OSCE Mission to Skopje, were mentioned as positive examples of existing preventive mechanisms in some municipalities.
However, many challenges were raised in different municipalities for establishing fully functioning preventive mechanisms.
Most importantly, the participants pointed to the need to assess unsustainable mechanisms and gather information on why such bodies ceased to function, as a basis for improving the design of preventive mechanisms for P/CVERLT that may be established.
4.3. Coordination between central and local authorities
The distribution of responsibilities and the mechanisms for interaction between local and central authorities are governed by principles laid down in the European Charter of Local Self-Government.
The general competence clause specifies that allocation of powers and responsibilities by law goes together with the recognition of the power of local authorities to intervene in any matter of local interest.
Consistent with this, roundtable participants took the position that the municipalities are best placed to support a multistakeholder local prevention mechanism and other P/CVERLT initiatives.
Municipal representatives stated that in order for such initiatives to function properly, the central government should establish co-operation and provide capacity building training.
They identified discrepancies between national and local priorities of institutions and the difficulty of requesting changes in the budget as the biggest challenges in trying to focus their work in a new area such as P/CVERLT.
There was a consensus from all local institutions in the selected municipalities that national top-down support needs to be established for all sensitive areas and especially for P/CVERLT.
Local institutions also reported difficulties in allocating time and resources, and the inability to implement action plans when local-level issues are not reflected in the national action plans.
Skopje and Tetovo were the two municipalities that were most receptive to organizing the roundtables discussed in this report, after the OSCE Mission to Skopje had earlier in the year held public consultations on the National Strategy and Action Plan on Countering Violent Extremism.
This demonstrated that the inclusion of all stakeholders in decision-making on a local level promotes buy-in and commitment to a national-level action plan, as it addresses local dynamics and community grievances.
For their part, central authorities acknowledge municipalities as the institutions that play a critical role in the interface with citizens.
Roundtable participants recommended that the central government consider developing mechanisms for the integration of multiple stakeholders for the management of policies and regulations affecting municipalities, especially policies dealing with sensitive topics.
Lack of horizontal and vertical communication was mentioned as the cause for the passiveness of institutions and absence of activities in prevention of VERLT.
Continuous inter-institutional communication is of utmost importance for a successful implementation of policies, as it favours a better understanding of policies and allows monitoring, assistance, advice and consultation regarding disputes.
This being the case, regular briefings should be held by national institutions to inform relevant stakeholders on the national and local level on strategic actions taken in addressing VERLT.
Continuous training of professionals working in prevention of violent extremism was also proposed, as one-off trainings do not provide appropriate support and guidance in dealing with the phenomenon of violent extremism.
This request was particularly common among educators and professional school staff, who pointed to the unmet need for ongoing professional development in the area of prevention of VERLT and other antisocial behaviours.
While the municipalities have general competency over education, changes to curricular activities need the approval of the Bureau for Development of Education, providing further evidence of the need for a multi-stakeholder approach to P/CVERLT.
Researchers face difficulties in obtaining VERLT data and statistics, which are mostly classified.
State institutions also need statistical data for proper planning of strategies and action plans.
Ideally, the needed data could be obtained locally by researchers communicating with practitioners and local stakeholders, then shared with the national coordination bodies.
Such efforts were mentioned by civil society representatives with experience in creating networks of practitioners working in the same area.
However, local institutions, municipalities and central government actors pointed to challenges in establishing a framework for co-operation, especially where both vertical and horizontal co operation are concerned.
Generally, the failure of local institutions to recognize their role in prevention has undermined institutional responses to addressing VERLT.
The general perception of most local institutions was that once the problem appears, they will act in order to mitigate harm and address consequences.
Only a few municipalities that had already seen good practices and results from a multistakeholder approach were receptive to addressing VERLT through similar coordinated, multi-stakeholder bodies.
The general consensus was that more work needs to be done to enable institutions to support prevention initiatives at the local level, and that coordination between central and local activities is crucial in order to operationalize the strategies and action plans on CVE.
5. RECOMMENDED BEST PRACTICES FOR P/CVERLT PROGRAMMES
This section presents key recommendations for best practices that can be applied in designing and implementing P/CVERLT programmes.
The recommended best practices are derived from the insights and lessons learned from the roundtable findings taken together as a whole.
1. Advocate for broad stakeholder co-operation using a whole-ofsociety approach.
Bring together relevant stakeholders from across civil society and different institutional sectors, specifically ensuring inclusion of practitioners with experience in the prevention of other forms of violence and risky social behaviours.
This approach recognizes the social roots of VERLT and allows for early interventions and noncoercive solutions when individuals or communities are at risk by addressing the factors conducive to VERLT.
2. Tailor programmes to the local context by prioritizing demanddriven solutions.
Each municipality has its own particular context and challenges that preclude a one-size-fits-all approach to implementing the National Strategy and Action Plan.
A local needs assessment should be conducted that includes an analysis of all forms of VERLT phenomena and the resources that can be leveraged in prevention.
Efforts should be made to build upon existing capacities and programming of local civil society.
3. Give local stakeholders a direct stake in P/CVERLT programmes.
Promote genuine empowerment of local stakeholders through their consultation and participation in decision-making processes; facilitate the inclusion of marginalized and under represented groups, such as minority communities, youth and women, who may also bring different voices and needs to the table.
4. Apply a conflict-sensitive lens in planning and designing programmes.
Understand local dynamics and sensitivities around inter-ethnic, religious, and political divisions that cause tensions and mistrust, as well as the need for trust-building between citizens and institutions, such as law enforcement.
Take steps to promote confidencebuilding and community dialogue on sensitive issues relating to VERLT.
Where possible, seek to address the legacy of local and national conflicts and community grievances as factors conducive to VERLT.
5. Prioritize human rights considerations and the principle of do-noharm.
Conducting a thorough risk assessment in project design is crucial for mitigating inadvertent stigmatization or infringement on human rights and fundamental freedoms, such as freedom of religion or belief.
Ensure that P/CVERLT efforts do not disproportionately engage with a particular ethnic or religious community in order to avoid interpretation of such efforts as profiling or discrimination.
Professional ethics and safeguards are also needed when working with children and adolescents that protect the specific rights and wellbeing of persons in these groups by preventing exposure to undue stigmatization.
6. Ensure that solutions to P/CVERLT are people-centred.
Efforts should focus on strengthening the protective factors for resilient communities and supporting the wellbeing of individuals.
Overly securitized approaches risk undermining partnerships with communities and institutional stakeholders by focusing on threat detection instead of addressing the underlying factors of VERLT and providing the necessary support to vulnerable individuals.
Care should also be taken to respect the independence, normative values and professional commitments of practitioners in civil society, education, religious institutions, mental health and social welfare.
7. Exercise caution around prematurely involving law enforcement.
Building police-community partnerships based on trust and collaboration requires cultivating sustained relationships over time, which should be in place first before engaging local communities on the highly sensitive issue of VERLT in order to avoid misunderstandings and stigmatization.
In cases concerning vulnerable individuals, the involvement of the police in what is a non-criminal space when no credible threat is imminent, may lead to stigmatization and possibly push an individual further down the path of radicalization.