Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
EARLY PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS
Scheduled for 5 June 2016
OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation Mission Final Report
THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
EARLY PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS
SCHEDULED FOR 5 JUNE 2016
OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation Mission Final Report
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Following an official invitation, on 31 March the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) established an Election Observation Mission (EOM) to observe the early parliamentary elections scheduled for 5 June.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM terminated its observation activities on 1 June, after the cancelation of elections.
The mission assessed whether the electoral process and activities conducted until that date were in line with OSCE commitments, other international obligations and standards for democratic elections and with national legislation.
Early parliamentary elections were scheduled as part of a Przino multi-party agreement designed to end political tensions stemming from the oppositions’ boycott of parliament and the release of wiretapped recordings on alleged abuse of power by senior government and public officials.
The political crisis deepened following opposition announced intention to boycott elections as key conditions of the agreement were not met. After negotiations, the parliament postponed the early elections initially scheduled for 24 April to 5 June. Regular demonstrations to cancel elections were organized, as well as counter demonstrations in support of holding elections.
The political climate was also impacted by President Gjorge Ivanov’s decision to issue a blanket pardon to all individuals who were charged, under investigation or suspected of involvement in the wiretapping scandal.
Of the four signatories of the Przino Agreement only the ruling party submitted candidate lists by the 11 May deadline. Two non-parliamentary parties, which nominated lists of candidates, were rejected on technical grounds.
Many OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors argued that having an election with one contestant questions political pluralism.
Some representatives of the international community stated that any government resulting from elections in which three major parties are not participating would not be a credible partner.
On 18 May the Constitutional Court issued a restraining order against decisions of parliament that were a result of its dissolution, although it had previously decided that it did not have the competence to review two such cases. On 25 May it declared the dissolution of the parliament unconstitutional.
Before the final court decision the parliament reconvened and voted for cancelling the 5 June elections.
The government returned to its composition prior to the Przino Agreement.
Although some measures to prevent intimidation and pressure on citizens were taken by the authorities, a climate of intimidation was frequently alleged by many OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors.
Several of them attributed this to a fear of retribution existing in state companies and institutions. The OSCE/ODIHR EOM received credible allegations of pressure on public sector employees to attend counter-demonstrations, including threats of termination of employment.
This raised questions about voters’ right to cast their vote free of fear of retribution, as provided by paragraph 7.7 of the 1990 OSCE Copenhagen Document.
Elections are primarily regulated by the Constitution and the Electoral Code.
In November 2015 the parliament adopted a significant number of amendments to the Electoral Code.
These amendments attempted to address most of the prior OSCE/ODIHR recommendations.
However, a number of OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors stressed the equal importance of full implementation of the Code.
The late changes negatively affected electoral stakeholders’ understanding of new provisions and impacted on their ability to fulfil their functions.
While the amendments represent an effort to improve the Code, OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors uniformly opined that the Electoral Code would benefit from a full review due to its internal inconsistencies and lack of coherence.
Between 120 and 123 members of parliament (MPs) are elected under a proportional representation system from closed lists.
Of these, 20 MPs are elected in each of the 6 in-country electoral districts.
As a result of the 2015 amendments to the Electoral Code, up to three MPs can be elected from a single out-of-country district.
Due to insufficient number of voters registered abroad, the out-of-country voting was cancelled, effectively disfranchising a number of voters.
Elections  are  managed  by  a  three-level  election  administration,  headed  by  the  State  Election Commission (SEC).
The 2015 amendments changed the SEC’s composition and increased its competences to include maintenance of the voter register.
The SEC worked in a very tense political environment and under criticism from the opposition and many  civil  society  organizations,  who  were  against  holding  elections  on  5  June.
It  met  the administrative deadlines and held regular meetings.
Despite a legal obligation to meet publicly, the SEC conducted two closed official sessions and regularly also held “working sessions” closed to public.
Its decisions were not systematically published on its website, diminishing the transparency of its work.
In addition, sessions of the SEC were boycotted by two opposition members.
While the SEC regional offices appeared to be staffed with experienced employees, local election officials  seemed  to  lack  any  decision-making  power.Many  complained  about  the  shortage  of necessary  resources  and  insufficient  support  and  direction  received  from  the  headquarters.
Moreover, the reappointment of members of Municipal Election Commissions was done during the electoral process, which impacted their work, including the formation of Electoral Boards.
The  current  system  of  voter  registration  based  on  personal  identification  number  can  ensure accuracy of voter lists and provide sufficient safeguards against fraud and double registration if implemented consistently and correctly.
While the SEC made significant efforts to timely conduct the updating the voter register by cross-checking the databases and field verifications, the process proved complex, methodologically challenging as well as requiring major resources.
The process was criticized by OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors for being chaotic, methodologically unsound and at times inadequately addressing prior allegations of fraud.
The  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  was  informed  about  a  number  of  examples  of  alleged  existence  of fictitious  voters  and  other  irregularities.
While  many  allegations  proved  to  be  false,  or  they pertained to registration errors which had already been corrected, instances of voters registered at non-existing addresses were noted, which can indicate either registration fraud or administrative error.
Addressing these allegations, the MoIA announced that as of 31 March 2016 there were 2,464,925 citizens in the population register, including 1,956,518 of voting age.
The progress report on updating voter lists issued by the SEC on 26 April did not reveal evidence of voter registration fraud.
The media environment is divided along ethnic lines and is characterized by a high number of media  outlets  operating  in  a  limited  advertising  market.
A  number  of  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM   interlocutors raised concerns regarding the deterioration of media freedom due to political pressure and owners interfering in the work of journalists.
Some opined that the government selection of the broadcasters for advertising is a reward for favourable coverage and editorial policy.
The  legal  framework  for  the  coverage  of  elections  was  substantially  amended;  however,  the majority of OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors highlighted the need for more substantial reform.
As part of the Przino Agreement, consultations between the four political parties and civil society organizations  were  held  to  further  reform  the  media  landscape,  but  draft  amendments  were dismissed by the parliament in April.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM media monitoring indicates that the newscasts of MRT-1 provided limited information  about  political  events  and  avoided  comprehensive  reporting  in  their  daily  news coverage.
In several cases, MRT-1 journalists mixed facts with their own political opinions when covering the news.
The most popular private TV stations, Sitel and Kanal 5, together with Alfa, displayed a unified approach in the news coverage with exclusively positive and neutral towards the ruling  party  and  negative  towards  the  main  opposition  party.
Telma  and  cable-only  Vesti  24 provided more balanced and in-depth coverage of the news.
The 2015 amendments to the Electoral Code adjusted the deadlines for hearing and deciding on electoral complaints and mandated that all hearings by administrative bodies be open to the public.
Despite  a  constitutional  requirement  to  hold  public  court  sessions,  the  Administrative  Court operated in a non-transparent manner, and reviewed the two election-related cases without holding a public hearing.
In addition, lack of permanent guidelines on the complaints process undermines the effectiveness of the means of legal redress that is required by paragraph 5.10 of the 1990 OSCE Copenhagen Document.
II.
INTRODUCTION AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  Following an official invitation, and based on the recommendation of a Needs Assessment Mission conducted from 2 to 5 November 2015, the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights  (OSCE/ODIHR)  established  an  Election  Observation  Mission  (EOM)  on  31  March  to observe  the  early  parliamentary  elections  scheduled  for  5  June  2016.
The  EOM,  headed  by Ambassador Jan Petersen, consisted of a 12-member core team based in Skopje and 24 long-term observers (LTOs) deployed throughout the country from 13 April.
Mission members were drawn from 21 OSCE participating States.2   With the cancellation of the elections on 18 May, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM ended its observation activities on 1 June.
The mission, however, assessed whether the electoral process and activities conducted until that date were in line with OSCE commitments, other international obligations and standards for democratic elections and with national legislation.
This final report follows two Interim Reports.3  The OSCE/ODIHR EOM wishes to thank the authorities for the invitation to observe the elections, as well as the State Election Commission (SEC), the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and other state and local authorities for their support and co-operation during the course of the EOM.
The mission  also  wishes  to  express  its  appreciation  to  the  OSCE  Mission  to  Skopje,4  other  international organizations  and  embassies  accredited  in  Skopje,  as  well  as  political  parties,  civil  society organizations and media representatives for their co-operation and support.
III.
POLITICAL CONTEXT  Early parliamentary elections were scheduled as part of the Przino Agreement signed on 2 June 2015 and its Protocol from 15 July, which were designed to end political tensions stemming from the oppositions’ boycott of parliament and the release of wiretapped recordings on alleged abuse of power by senior government and public officials.5   This agreement, concluded between the four major parties – the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization – Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity (VMRO-DPMNE), the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM), the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI), and the Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA), was facilitated by the European Commission (EC).6 The early elections were initially scheduled for 24 April 2016.
In January 2016, the SDSM announced that they would not participate in the elections, maintaining that key Przino Agreement conditions had not been met, specifically cleaning of the voter register, media  reforms,  and  separation  of  state  and  party  activities.7  On  23  February,  the  parliament approved a DUI motion to postpone the dissolution of the parliament and on 15 April the parliament speaker re-scheduled elections for 5 June.
The political climate deteriorated after 12 April, when President Gjorge Ivanov issued a blanket pardon to all individuals who were charged, under investigation or suspected of involvement in the wiretapping scandal.8 All of the major political parties condemned the pardon and called on the president to rescind his decision.
The pardon triggered protests and counter protests.9 United under the  Protestiram  umbrella,  the  demonstrators  called  for  the  resignation  of  the  president  and cancelation of elections.
While the Protestiram representatives stated their political independence, VMRO-DPMNE claimed that the protests were orchestrated by SDSM.
Counter-demonstrations  organized  by  Civil  Movement  for  Defense  (GDOM)  supported  the  government  position  by maintaining that elections be held on 5 June.
Although some measures to prevent pressure on citizens were taken by the authorities, such as political statements and establishing hot-lines, a climate of intimidation was frequently alleged by many OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors, and several of them attributed this to a fear of retribution existing  in  state  companies  and  institutions.
While  no  official  complaints  were  filed,  the OSCE/ODIHR EOM received credible allegations of pressure on public sector employees to attend the counter-demonstrations, including threats of termination of employment.10 This raises questions about voters’ right to cast their ballot free of fear of retribution as provided by the 1990 OSCE Copenhagen Document.11  Citizens, including public or state employees, should not be subject to pressure or intimidation.
Authorities  should  actively  encourage  citizens  to  report  any  cases  of  pressure,  supported  by verifiable  evidence.
Any  instances  and  allegations  of  pressure  and  intimidation  should  be thoroughly and effectively investigated and prosecuted by authorities.
The pre-campaign period was characterised by an exchange of harsh rhetoric between the main political parties, particularly between VMRO-DPMNE and SDSM.
VMRO-DPMNE maintained that holding early elections was the only way out of the political crisis while for the SDSM implementation of the Przino Agreement was the priority before any elections could take place.
On 9 April, SDSM and 17 smaller parties signed the Platform for a Democratic Macedonia, calling for the implementation of the Przino Agreement and announced a boycott of elections.
The DUI and DPA eventually stated that they stood for inclusive elections with all parties running.
Most parties were waiting for an increased involvement of the international community in resolving the crisis.
After negotiations, no political agreement was reached, and of the four parties signatories of the Przino Agreement only VMRO-DPMNE submitted candidate lists on 11 May, and eventually was the only registered electoral contestant.
Many OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors argued that having an election with one contestant questions political pluralism.
On 17 May, a European Commission representative stated that they “do not see that the minimum conditions  to  enable  credible  elections  on  5  June  2016,  which  could  be  recognized  by  the International Community, are met” and that “any government resulting from elections in which three major parties are not participating would not be a credible partner for the International Community”.12   On 18 May, the Constitutional Court heard a DUI petition, submitted on 15 May, seeking to declare the dissolution of parliament unconstitutional.
The petition argued that elections could only be held within 60 days from the day of the dissolution of the parliament.
In a unanimous decision, the court issued a restraining order against the decision on the dissolution of the parliament, including the speaker of the parliament’s announcement of elections for 5 June.
The campaign period and all election-related activities were suspended until the court decided on the underlying petition or lifted the restraining order.
Before the final court decision, the parliament convened on 18 May and voted unanimously to remove from the Electoral Code the date of 5 June as the designated election day.13 No new date was set for the elections.
On 25 May, the Constitutional Court granted the DUI petition and declared the dissolution of parliament unconstitutional, thereby nullifying the decree of the speaker calling elections for 5 June.
Previously the court rejected the similar case twice for lack of their competency  on  the  matter.
Several  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  interlocutors  claimed  that  the Constitutional Court decision was influenced by the political developments.
At the session on 18 May, the parliament approved the resignations of the SDSM ministers that had been submitted on 6 April, and replaced them with representatives of the ruling VMRO-DPMNE coalition.
The SDSM and DPA stated that the Przino Agreement was violated, as the establishment of the interim government was one of its provisions.
The parliament also amended the Law on Pardon to allow for the president to revoke previously given pardons, which the president did on 6 June.14 A number of opposition representatives initiated a procedure to impeach President Ivanov on grounds of violating the constitution when granting the pardons.
On 21 June the parliament failed to achieve the two thirds majority needed to pass the initiative.
IV.
LEGAL FRAMEWORK  Elections are regulated by the Constitution and the Electoral Code, supplemented by regulations promulgated by the SEC.15 The Electoral Code was adopted in 2006 but has since then been substantively amended.
Following the Przino Agreement, a working group was created with the participation of VMRO-DPMNE, SDSM, DUI and DPA.
The group reached consensus on electoral reform and on 9 November  the  parliament  adopted  a  significant  number  of  amendments.16  The  amendments attempted to address most of the prior OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, particularly those related to the principle of equal suffrage for out-of-country voting, the composition and competences of the SEC, level playing field in terms of media coverage during the election period, strengthening party and campaign finance reporting and auditing, improving safeguards for the separation of party and state, introducing deadlines for courts to decide on electoral disputes and clarifying the definition of campaigning and campaign period.
Voter photographs on voter lists and the marking of voters’ thumbs with ink were introduced as possible safeguards against multiple voting.
While  the  amendments  represent  an  effort  to  improve  the  Electoral  Code,  a  number  of OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  interlocutors  opined  that  the  late  changes  negatively  affected  electoral stakeholders’ understanding of provisions and their ability to fulfil their functions.17 For example, very few stakeholders were aware of or understood the new provisions on political advertising using posters, billboards and advertising panels.
In addition, the provisions on early campaigning were not effective as the definition of electoral contestants who cannot campaign is limited to those who are confirmed as candidates by the SEC, which  does  not  occur  until  just  before  the  campaign  begins.
Provisions  on  the  registration procedures for out-of-country voters also need to be clarified in order to ensure enfranchisement of all eligible voters.
OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors uniformly opined that the Electoral Code would benefit from a complete review.
They also stressed that full and effective implementation of the Code is of equal importance.
The Electoral Code would benefit from a complete review in order to harmonize it internally and with other relevant laws.
The review should be conducted after consultations between all political stakeholders and relevant civil society organizations.
It should be completed well in advance of the next elections.
Training for electoral staff and public awareness programmes should be undertaken to enhance the effective implementation of the Code.
V.  ELECTORAL SYSTEM   Between 120 and 123 members of parliament (MPs) are elected under a proportional representation system from closed lists.
Of these, 20 MPs are elected in each of the 6 in-country electoral districts.
As a result of the 2015 amendments to the Electoral Code, up to three MPs can be elected from a single out-of-country district.18   The new system of out-of-country voting was an attempt to balance the votes of in-country and out-of-country voters.19 On 13 May, the SEC cancelled the out-of-country voting as it considered that insufficient number of citizens had registered to vote.20 The decision effectively disfranchised all registered out-of-country voters, as the SEC made no alternative provision for them to exercise their right to vote.
If the current out-of-country voting system is maintained, alternative provisions should be made for voters to exercise their right to vote if voting abroad is cancelled.
On 13 May, the SEC sent a letter to the Minister of Justice and the speaker of parliament notifying them that three of the six in-country districts had a greater deviation in the number of voters than  the 5 per cent allowed by the Electoral Code.21 In December 2015, the SEC had previously notified these institutions about this inconsistency but no action was taken to change the districts before parliament was dissolved in April.
The Electoral Code does not include a procedure for setting district boundaries or criteria by which they should be drawn, which is contrary to international good practice.
The Code assigns a specific number of polling stations to each district.22 Moreover, the law obliges the SEC to divide polling stations with more than 1,000 registered voters prior to an election, therefore the list of polling stations included in the Electoral Code would not always be accurate.
To ensure equality of the vote, legislation could foresee periodic review of district boundaries by an independent  body.
When  district  boundaries  are  redefined,  it  should  be  done  in  a  timely, transparent, impartial and inclusive manner.
VI.
ELECTION ADMINISTRATION  The three-level election administration comprised the SEC, 80 Municipal Election Commissions (MECs) and some 3,480 Electoral Boards (EBs).
The SEC was supported by its 34 regional and local offices.
The  SEC  is  responsible  for  the  overall  conduct  of  the  elections.
MECs  are  responsible  for overseeing the electoral process in each municipality, appointment and training of EBs, tabulation and announcement of municipal results, as well as other technical preparations under the guidance of the SEC.
EBs are responsible for the conduct of election day procedures at polling stations.
Following the Przino Agreement, the composition of the SEC was enlarged from seven to nine members.
In addition to six parliamentary party representatives nominated by the governing parties (VMRO-DPMNE – 2 and DUI – 1) and the opposition (SDSM – 2 and DPA – 1), the commission also included three independent experts not affiliated with any political party.23 The new SEC was appointed for a five-year term by the parliament on 16 December 2015, five months later than called for in the Przino Agreement.
The SEC president and his deputy were elected from among the non-partisan members.
In line with previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, the SEC resources were strengthened by recruiting additional personnel in the legal department and IT section as well as in some regional offices.
However, these are all temporary positions until 31 December 2016.
To ensure sustainability of the SEC administrative capacity, all necessary support positions should be permanent, based on open and competitive recruitment.
The main focus of the SEC was on reviewing the voter register.
After the calling of elections, the SEC began administrative preparations by adopting an electoral calendar with legal deadlines, many of which were shortened because of early elections, as well as an operational budget.24 The SEC met the legal administrative deadlines and held regular public sessions.
However, the transparency of its work was diminished when it met in closed working sessions, not accessible to observers and media.
However, no decisions were adopted in such meetings.
Moreover, the SEC held two formal closed sessions, where decisions on changes in the appointments of MECs and some technical issues were adopted.
In addition, nearly all SEC decisions adopted since March 2016 were not published on their website, contrary to the SEC Rules of Procedures.
Such lack of transparency is at odds with international standards and good practice.25  As required by law and in order to increase transparency and public confidence in its work, all SEC sessions should be open to public; all SEC decisions should be published on their website without delay.
The SEC worked in a tense political environment and under criticism from the opposition and some civil society organizations who were against holding elections on 5 June.
On 15 April, when election day was called, the commission voted with six votes in favour that they are “lawfully, conscientiously and transparently ready to conduct all electoral activities”.
The SEC president and the two SDSM representatives left the meeting without voting and the SDSM representatives did not return to sessions until 13 May.
While the SEC regional offices appeared to be staffed with experienced employees, local election officials seemed to lack any decision-making power and many of them complained about the shortage  of  necessary  resources  and  insufficient  support  and  direction  received  from  the headquarters.
The widespread  expectation of cancelation or postponement of 5 June elections impacted on the level of engagement of election officials.
Each MEC is composed of a president, four members and their deputies randomly selected from among employees of the public administration with university education for a five-year term.
EBs comprise a president, four members and their deputies appointed for a four-year term.
The president and two members (and their deputies) are randomly selected from among employees of public administration and the remaining two members are nominated by political parties, one from the ruling political parties and one from the opposition.
As the five-year mandate of the MECs expired on 28 April, the SEC appointed new MEC members through a random selection computer programme.
As a result of such selection, the civil servants were appointed to MECs without prior consultations and at times against their will.
More than 50 of the 800 MEC members requested the SEC to cancel their selection quoting health reasons, political party affiliation or lack of necessary education.
The MEC appointment was not harmonized with the calendar of deadlines for the 2016 elections, as it happened during the electoral period.
There was no time left for the new members to receive any training before commencing their duties, contrary to international good practice.26 In addition, due to the poor communication between the SEC and MECs, many of the new members were not aware of their appointments to MECs for several days.27 The establishment of many MECs was further delayed by allocating inadequate resources, including office space and computers.
As a result of such delays, none of the EBs were appointed either by the legal deadline of 6 May or by the cancelation  of  election  activities  on  18  May.
The  VMRO-DPMNE  was  the  only  party  that submitted its list of representatives to the EBs.
Consideration should be given to establishing and ensuring a more efficient communication and support from SEC to local election management bodies.
Comprehensive and standardized training for SEC local officials and MEC members should be undertaken before new elections are called.
The local offices should be provided with the necessary resources for conducting their work in a timely and effective manner.
The Electoral Code provides for equitable representation of ethnic groups and each gender in election administration bodies.28 Of the nine SEC members, two are women and three are ethnic-Albanians.
Positively, some 47 per cent of MEC members are women.
In 22 MECs the required number of ethnic-Albanian members was ensured.
In three MECs ethnic-Turks were represented while ethnic-Serbs and Roma were represented in one MEC each.
VII.
VOTER REGISTRATION  Voter registration is passive, with the exception of voters temporarily residing abroad who must actively register.
Voting rights are granted to all citizens over the age of 18 years with a registered residence in the country who have a valid national identification documents or a biometric passport.
The accuracy  of the voter register,  and subsequently of the voter lists, was one of the most contentious issues in the political crisis.
The OSCE/ODIHR has previously recommended clear, co-ordinated, and transparent procedures for all institutions involved in updating the voter lists.
The 2015 amendments to the Electoral Code granted the SEC the sole responsibility for maintaining the voter register based on data extracted mainly from the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MoIA), while the  MoIA  maintained  control  over  the  databases  of  unique  personal  identification  numbers, residence registration and the records on personal identification documents issued to citizens.29        A.  UPDATE OF THE VOTER REGISTER   In February 2016, as per its adopted methodology, the SEC started updating the voter register by cross-checking the databases of 11 state institutions, as well as by conducting field verifications.30 All OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors stated that this process proved operationally complex and methodologically challenging, as well as requiring major financial and human resources.
At the start of the process, the SEC searched for inconsistencies in the databases and analysed records that could indicate possible irregularities, such as deceased persons on the lists, large number of voters registered at the same address or voters with similar names and dates of birth.
Out of approximately 1.8 million voters, over 300,000 voters were identified as needing clarification of their  status.
Some  220,000  records  of  voters  were  forwarded  for  verification  to  several  state institutions.
As a result of data crosschecking, the SEC published a list of 89,000 citizens whose registration records were to be confirmed during field visits at voters’ residence.
Between 28 March and 5 April, over 550 SEC representatives visited the households of some 87,000 voters and filled out questionnaires.31 The field checks confirmed 47,560 records (the voters concerned were met in person) and 39,792 records were forwarded for additional administrative checks to the MoIA and the Ministry of Justice.
Subsequently, nearly all of those records were established to be accurate.
While the SEC made significant efforts to conduct the field verification, which was also aimed to increase public confidence, alleged irregularities, such as fictitious voters and other fraudulent practices, were still being used as one of the main arguments for the postponement of the elections.
The supporters of this idea criticized the process for being chaotic, methodologically unsound and at times inadequately addressing prior allegations of fraud.
Between March and May 2016, the SEC submitted to the MoIA 45 written requests for data verification.
Many of the MoIA responses were signed only by the deputy minister, as the minister, representing SDSM, refused to do so arguing that more time was needed to conduct accurate checks.
The SDSM representatives in the SEC questioned the legality of such documents, but the SEC decided to accept them.32   The interior minister also requested the SEC to remove some 130,000 voters who possess a passport but not a valid identification document to prove the residence.
The SEC rejected this request on the ground that law provides for registration of voters with either a valid identification card or a passport.
One of the most important SEC requests to the MoIA pertained to 73,000 voters identified by SEC as requiring confirmation of their residence status.
While MoIA formally confirmed the legality of these records, many OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors questioned whether this verification was done scrupulously.
One of the main examples of concerns about registration irregularities was the so called “Pustec voters” – the citizens living in the Republic of Albania whose voter eligibility was in question because of unclear residency status.33 These persons were allegedly added to the voter lists in Skopje Centar municipality to influence the outcome of local elections.34 According to the MoIA, in January 2016 a total of 349 identification cards of these persons were cancelled for not having the right to register residence at specific addresses.
Allegations  of  fictitious  records  in  the  voter  register  persisted,  as  many  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM stakeholders claimed that the total number of voters was suspiciously high based on the number of citizens as per the 2002 census.
Inaccuracy in the voter lists was also used by many OSCE/ODIHR interlocutors as an argument for postponing elections.
Addressing these allegations, and upon a SEC request, the MoIA announced that as of 31 March there were 2,464,925 citizens in the population register, including 1,956,518 over 18 years and some 150,000 without residence or valid identification document.
In addition, the last progress report on updating voter lists issued by the SEC on 26 April did not reveal evidence of voter registration fraud.
Almost all of the 300,000 records initially identified by SEC as questionable were validated.
Minor changes were made, mainly by removing over 1,100 deceased persons identified during electronic data crosschecks.
B.
PUBLIC INSPECTION OF THE VOTER LISTS  The public inspection of preliminary voter lists for the 5 June elections was conducted between 25 April and 9 May  at SEC’s 34 regional and local offices.
Voters could check their own data electronically but not the data of other citizens as required by the Electoral Code.
The system of public verification was more cumbersome for those without access to internet and those who live in rural areas.
The inspection process was not implemented uniformly across the country – while in some offices voters could check their data by their personal identification number, in others this was possible also by name, address and polling station number.
Only 4,716 voters verified the accuracy of their data.
As of 17 May, there were 1,804,348 registered voters on the voter lists.
The SEC had to remove on 30 March the voter lists from the website due to a decision of the Directorate for Personal Data Protection prohibiting the publication of personal data of voters including name, gender, address, date of birth and polling station number.35 The lack of possibility for voters to  check the voter lists during this time impacted the transparency  and the public confidence in the quality of voter lists.36    To increase public confidence and provide easier access of voters to verify voter lists, consideration could be given to displaying printed excerpts  of voter lists at locations convenient to voters, possibly at polling stations.
The  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  was  informed  about  a  number  of  examples  of  alleged  existence  of fictitious voters (so called “phantom voters”) and other irregularities.37 The EOM followed up on a randomly selected sample of such irregularities; while many of the checked allegations proved to be false or pertained to registration errors which had already been corrected, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM confirmed  instances  of  voters  registered  at  non-existing  addresses,  which  can  indicate  either registration malpractice or administrative errors.38   On 14 May, the SEC shared the voter lists with the four largest political parties who had five days to request any changes.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM is not informed of any requests made by political parties by the 22 May deadline.
On 26 May, the SEC published the entire voter list on its website, ensuring broad public access to registration  data  as  the  lists  could  be  checked  by  personal  identification  number,  names  and addresses.
Voters  could  apply  for  any  changes  in  person  at  the  local  offices  of  SEC.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM is not informed of any challenges made by voters or other stakeholders.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM noted the ongoing discussion on replacing the existing passive voter registration  system  with  an  active  registration  system  as  a  means  to  prevent  the  alleged irregularities.
Some OSCE/ODIHR interlocutors, however, argued that active registration is costly, time consuming and likely to disenfranchise voters unable to visit registration centers for personal reasons, such as disability or living abroad.
The  current  system  of  voter  registration  based  on  personal  identification  number  can  ensure accuracy of voter lists and provide sufficient safeguards against fraud and double registration if implemented consistently and correctly.
While the MoIA is responsible for the accuracy of records, it is also critical that citizens inform the relevant authorities of any changes in their personal data and residency in a timely matter, as required by the law.39   The SEC and MoIA should continue the process of updating of voter register though a co-ordinated effort according to clear responsibilities and procedures.
Adequate resources and time should be allocated to accomplish this task before the next elections.
This process should be transparent and ensure  access  to  political  parties  and  civil  society.
It  should  be  accompanied  by  a  public information  campaign  in  order  to  increase  the  citizens’  confidence  in  the  accuracy  of  voter registration.
VIII.
CANDIDATE REGISTRATION  Any eligible voter can be a candidate for parliament, except those who have been sentenced by a final court decision to more than six months imprisonment and have not completed their sentence.
The  law  also  identifies  a  range  of  government  and  government-related  positions  that  are  incompatible with candidacy.40 In addition, MPs cannot work in state administration bodies or engage in business or other profitable activity.
Candidates can be nominated by political parties, coalitions of political parties, or by groups of voters.
Lists  submitted  by  groups  of  voters  are  required  to  provide  at  least  1,000  supporting signatures of voters residing in the  respective  district.
In line with a  previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendation, a voter could sign in support of more than one prospective contestant.
However, contrary to a prior OSCE/ODIHR recommendation, signatures must still be collected in front of a regional  SEC  representative.
According  to  several  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  interlocutors,  the requirement to visit a SEC office may have a dissuasive or intimidating effect on some voters, especially in smaller communities.
As previously recommended, consideration could be given to providing alternative methods for signature collection in order to reduce the potential for intimidation.
By the 11 May deadline, the SEC received three candidate lists.
Of the four major parliamentary parties, only the VMRO-DPMNE coalition submitted lists.
The lists respected the new Electoral Code provision requiring that at least 40 percent of candidates must belong to the less represented gender.41   Two non-parliamentary parties, the National Movement for Macedonia (NMM) and the Social Democratic Party of Macedonia (SDP), also nominated candidates.
No independent lists were submitted.
The SEC accepted the VMRO-DPMNE lists on 12 May and returned the other two parties lists for correction of deficiencies.42 On 15 May, the SDP withdrew its lists and the SEC rejected the NMM lists for failure to correct the identified deficiencies.
To avoid any confusion and the rejection of candidate list for technical reasons, all specific documents required for each list could be enumerated in the Electoral Code.
The candidate registration process concluded with only one registered contestant, a situation which the Electoral Code does not specifically regulate.
A review of the Electoral Code could consider including provisions to regulate the situation where only one electoral contestant is running for parliamentary elections.
IX.
CAMPAIGN FINANCE  The Electoral Code regulates the financing of election campaigns.
All campaign-related donations and expenditures must go through a dedicated bank account.
Eligible private persons are allowed to donate up to the equivalent of EUR 3,000 in MKD, while legal entities may donate up to an equivalent of EUR 30,000.43 Foreign or anonymous donations, as well as those from state-owned,  religious and charitable organizations, are prohibited.
Discounts given by media outlets to campaign participants for political advertisements are considered donations and are prohibited.
An electoral contestant may not spend more than an equivalent of EUR 1.8 per registered voter in a given electoral district.
Electoral contestants have to submit two interim and a final campaign finance reports to the SEC, State Commission for Preventing Corruption (SCPC) and the State Audit Office (SAO).
In line with previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, itemized reporting on campaign finance expenditure is now required and the SAO has been given the explicit authority to request additional explanations from contestants during the audit process.
As the elections were cancelled just two days after the campaign began, no campaign finance reports were filed.
The SAO is obligated to audit the final campaign finance reports within 60 days of submission.
If irregularities are detected the SAO initiates a misdemeanour procedure or reports the irregularities to the respective public prosecutor within 30 days of detection.
The SAO has the right to request additional explanations and data from electoral contestants.
The SAO stated to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that they were not properly resourced for carrying out supervision of campaign finance reports as they  are auditors and not investigators.
Further, they do not possess the necessary personnel to carry out monitoring of campaign finance spending in order to determine if there are irregularities.
Monitoring  and  supervision  of  campaign  finance  provisions  should  be  carried  out  by  an independent  agency  that  has  the  necessary  personnel  and  expertise  to  effectively  monitor  for irregularities.
Should that be the SAO, they should be provided with the adequate powers and resources.
X.
MEDIA  A.
MEDIA ENVIRONMENT  The media environment is divided along ethnic lines and is characterized by a high number of media  outlets  operating  in  a  limited  advertising  market.44  A  number  of  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM interlocutors raised concerns regarding the deterioration of media freedom due to political pressure and owners interfering in the work of journalists.
The OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media (RFoM) called on the authorities “to ease the pressure on media and respect free and critical voices”.45  The  public  broadcaster,  Macedonian  Radio  and  Television  (MRT),  operates  three  channels nationally and is funded through a broadcast tax imposed on households and legal entities.
It is also entitled to seek and receive additional funds from the state budget.
The majority of the private broadcasters that the OSCE/ODIHR EOM met with reported minimal or no profit, and rely on the support from their owners as well as government-funded advertisements.46 A number of OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors opined that the government choice of broadcasters  for  advertising  is  perceived  as  a  reward  for  favourable  coverage  and  editorial  policy.47  This contradicts a recommendation made by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), which requires state institutions to treat all media that receive direct and indirect subsidies fairly and with neutrality.48 In addition, the law prohibits political parties and office holders at state institutions, as well as their family members to own broadcasters.49  The  allocation  of  state  advertisements  should  be  done  in  a  transparent,  objective  and  non-discriminatory manner, including by providing detailed information on the substance and funds for such advertisements.
B.
LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE MEDIA  Coverage of the elections by media outlets is governed by the Electoral Code and the 2013 Law on Audio  and  Audiovisual  Media  Services.
The  legal  framework  for  coverage  of  elections  was substantially amended in November 2015.
It now provides detailed requirements for paid political advertisements and prohibits broadcasters and their owners to donate funds to the contestants; shortens deadlines for media-related complaints and misdemeanours procedures and increases fines for violations; prohibits the coverage of state officials that favours a political party; allows non-parliamentary parties to receive free airtime on the Parliamentary Channel and obliges MRT to host regular election debates.
The amendments also include requirements for campaign coverage by Internet portals.
Despite these amendments, the majority of OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors highlighted  a  need  for  continued  substantial  reform.50  As  part  of  the  Przino  Agreement, consultations between the four political parties and civil society organizations were held to further reform  the  media  landscape,  however,  the  parties  have  failed  to  reach  a  consensus  while amendments coming from civil society organizations were dismissed by the parliament on 4 April.
The Electoral Code prohibits coverage of the regular activities of state institutions that promote political  parties  and  coalitions.
It  also  details  the  coverage  requirements  during  the  official campaign period, at times in an over-regulated manner.
The Electoral Code obliges the MRT, as well other broadcast and Internet media to cover the elections in a fair, balanced and unbiased manner providing contestants with equitable access.
By law, the balance is established on the number of candidate lists, which are officially confirmed only few days before the start of the official campaign period.
As such, a balanced coverage is not enforceable during the pre-campaign period.
In January 2016, the MRT adopted Ethical and Professional Principles of MRT for Media Coverage of  the  Election  Process,  establishing  the  general  guidelines  for  their  journalists  to  cover  the elections.
In addition, the Electoral Code provides very detailed and exact requirements for the  coverage of the campaign which results in excessive coverage of the  campaigns of the main political parties.51 This may also challenge MRT’s editorial independence.52   The Electoral Code also outlines detailed requirements for paid political advertisements, allowing 18 minutes per hour in total.53 As the law also allows 12 minutes per hour of broadcast for commercial advertisements, a number of OSCE/ODIHR interlocutors were of the opinion that 30 minutes of advertisement per hour of broadcast is excessive.
The prices for the advertisements could not exceed the average commercial prices during the three months prior to the announcement of the elections; however, the Code does not envisage any verification of the media fulfilling this requirement.
The Agency for Audio and Audiovisual Media Services (AVMS) is the key regulator for the broadcast media.
It is legally required to monitor broadcasters and their websites from the day of the announcement of elections until the day of voting, publish weekly reports before the campaign, and publish daily reports during the campaign.
The agency has no legal power to impose sanctions directly, but can bring the identified violation to the court’s attention.
AVMS monitored only national broadcasters during the pre-campaign period.
It did not monitor Internet media stating that there was lack of a clear definition of Internet portals in the legislation, which did not allow them to establish a clear monitoring sample.
AVMS released three interim and one final reports covering the pre-campaign period.
The reports concluded that private broadcasters Alfa, Kanal 5, Kanal 5+, Sitel and Nova failed to provide objective and unbiased coverage as prescribed by the law.
The reports also concluded that the first four media listed above co-ordinated their editorial policy.54 The agency took no action based on the biased coverage, while the Electoral Code sanctions such violations, no sanctions are provided by the Law on Audio and Audiovisual Media Services.
The Electoral Code could be amended to clarify the requirements for balanced reporting during the pre-campaign period.
Consideration could be given to provide AVMS with greater resources to undertake  its  oversight  role  and  sanctioning  powers  that  are  effective,  proportionate  and dissuasive.
On 13 May the AVMS forwarded to the court an initiative for a misdemeanour procedure against Alfa, Kanal 5 and Sitel for a number of reports covering activities of state institutions that were promoting  VMRO-DPMNE.
Despite  the  48-hours  legal  requirement,  the  court  did  not  issue  decision at the time of this reporting.55 The AVMS also identified violations in the third monitoring period, but it did not initiate any sanctions after the elections were cancelled.
The Council of Media Ethics (CME) is a self–regulatory body that reviews complaints about media content.
On 12 February, the members of the Council signed the Charter on Ethical Reporting during Elections, pledging to report in a balanced, truthful, impartial and objective manner.
The CME did not perform any monitoring of the media nor had performed any other activities related to elections during the electoral period.
C.  MEDIA MONITORING FINDINGS  The OSCE/ODIHR EOM conducted media monitoring of major broadcast and print media outlets during the pre-campaign period and the two days of election campaign.56 The newscasts of the public MRT-1 provided limited information about political events and avoided comprehensive reporting in their daily news coverage.
The coverage of the relevant political actors was mainly factual and neutral and was largely devoted to government activities (30 per cent), VMRO-DPMNE (18 per cent) and SDSM (15 per cent).
All other political parties received marginal coverage.
In several cases, MRT-1 journalists mixed facts with their own political opinions when covering the news.
The Albanian language service of MRT-2 devoted more attention, proportionally, to the ethnic-Albanian parties, especially to DUI, which received 13 per cent of mainly neutral coverage, while SDSM and VMRO-DPMNE received each 12 per cent of same type of coverage.
Numerous talk shows served as a platform for political parties to present their views, however, there was a lack of genuine policy debate among the two major political forces – VMRO-DPMNE and SDSM.
The Electoral Code requires the public broadcaster to organize debates between the ruling and opposition parties during the campaign period.
MRT-1 attempted to organize two debates between  VMRO-DPMNE,  SDSM,  DUI  and  DPA;  however  only  VMRO-DPMNE  chose  to participate and only once.
While Telma, Vesti 24 and Alsat-M were hosting regular debates and talk shows, they stated to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that VMRO-DPMNE ignored their invitations.57   The most popular private TV stations, Sitel and Kanal 5, together with Alfa, displayed a unified approach in the news coverage.
They allocated between 24 and 26 per cent of politically relevant news coverage to the activities of VMRO-DPMNE, between 21 and 27 per cent to SDSM and about 6 per cent to all other parties combined.
The tone of the coverage was almost exclusively positive and neutral towards VMRO-DPMNE, their high-level government members, as well as the counter-demonstrations organized by GDOM.
At times, the coverage of governmental activities was linked with the promotion of VMRO-DPMNE’s future policies, which is contrary to the Electoral Code.
The coverage of SDSM and of the ministers representing the party, the Special Prosecutor Office and the demonstrations organized by Protestiram was mainly  negative in tone.
The  coverage included selective presentation of the facts and opinions voiced by the journalists, many times using identical sentences on all three broadcasters.
To guarantee equitable coverage and access for all political contestants, the broadcast media should ensure balance in their news and current affairs reporting in the pre-campaign period, as required by the law.
Telma and cable-only Vesti 24 provided more balanced and in-depth coverage of the news.
Both stations devoted equitable proportions of largely neutral coverage to VMRO-DPMNE (17 and 15 per cent) and SDSM (15 and 12 per cent).
Alsat-M¸ which mainly broadcasts in Albanian language also devoted equitable proportions (between 10 and 12 per cent) of coverage to VMRO-DPMNE, SDSM and DUI, although it was largely critical of VMRO-DPMNE and neutral to other parties.
The political coverage in the print media was more polarized than broadcast media.
While Dnevnik was  clearly  biased  against  SDSM,  the  majority  of  the  political  coverage  by  Sloboden  Pecat presented VMRO-DPMNE and the government in a negative manner.
The tabloid Vest provided very  limited  political  coverage,  but  was  leaning  towards  VMRO-DPMNE.
Albanian  language newspapers Koha and Lajm were more focused on the activities of the ethnic-Albanian parties.
While Koha mainly focused on the activities and projects of DUI, Lajm was largely criticizing DUI and their members of the government.
XI.
CITIZEN AND INTERNATIONAL OBSERVERS  The Electoral Code provides for international and citizen election observation.
The citizen observer organization MOST engaged in a comprehensive monitoring of the electoral process with 80 long-term observers.
The CIVIL organization had 35 long-term observers.
On 4 May MOST filed the application for the accreditation of 27 observers to the SEC; the SEC did not grant accreditation to them before the elections were cancelled on 18 May, however, this did not hinder their observation activities.
Both CIVIL and MOST were critical of the electoral process, particularly in respect of a non-transparent field review of voter lists, misuse of state resources for party purposes, and pressure upon public administration employees.
MOST and CIVIL claimed that the government failed to provide conditions for holding credible elections.58   XII.
COMPLAINTS AND APPEALS  Election-related complaints can be filed by authorized representatives of candidates, submitters of candidates’ lists, and voters.
The complaints are heard by the SEC, and its decisions can be appealed to the Administrative Court, which makes a final judgment.59 The MECs do not have jurisdiction over electoral complaints.
In response to prior OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, the 2015 amendments to the Electoral Code shortened the deadlines for hearing and deciding on electoral complaints and require the SCPC to examine cases at a public session.
Decisions on complaints should be published on their websites.
Despite  the  constitutional  requirement  for  all  court  hearings  and  verdicts  to  be  public,  the Administrative Court operated in a non-transparent manner, and reviewed the two election-related cases without a public hearing.
The court informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that the judges would decide the cases in private.
The lack of guaranteed public hearings by the Administrative Court is contrary to OSCE commitments and other international standards, reducing public confidence in the process.60  The Electoral Code should be harmonized with the Constitution and state clearly that all hearings on election related cases should be held in public and that decisions are made public immediately.
Of the two cases, the first one related to publishing voter lists on the SEC website.
The Directorate for Personal Data Protection issued a decision on 29 March ordering the SEC to remove the voter lists from its website as this violated the law on personal data protection.
On 9 April, the SEC appealed the decision to the Administrative Court.61  Although the case was time sensitive, the court did not make a decision until 5 May and did not publish the decision until 16 May, after the deadline for public inspection of the voter lists had passed.62 Due to the delay, the voters did not have the possibility to check the voter lists for irregularities as provided for in the Electoral Code.
To ensure effective remedy, all election-related cases should be decided within timely deadlines clearly stated in the law.
The second case concerned the appeal of the SEC decision rejecting the candidate list on procedural grounds submitted by the NMM.
On 17 May, the court found that in order to check the eligibility of a candidate, it was legitimate for the SEC to request copies of identification documents and criminal records.
In contrast to the Administrative Court, the Constitutional Court held public sessions when hearing the petition on the unconstitutionality of the dissolution of parliament and published its decision on the day the hearing was held.
In line with previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, the SEC established a legal department for handling complaints.
However, the SEC did not adopt an instruction for deciding on complaints and appeals, as required by the Electoral Code.
The lack of permanent guidelines on the complaints and appeals process inhibits the ability of electoral stakeholders to submit complaints, and undermines the effectives of the means of legal redress, as required by paragraph 5.10 of the 1990 OSCE Copenhagen Document.63 In addition, the Electoral Code calls for the establishment of a system for case and complaint management that was not operational for these elections.
To allow effective legal remedy, the SEC should develop permanent instructions on complaints and appeals  process.
Such  regulations  could  be  harmonized  with  the  new  complaint  management system.
Telephone  hotlines  were  established  by  several  state  institutions:  the  Ministry  of  Information Society and Administration for public sector employees to report any election-related pressure; the Ombudsman  Office  for  citizens  to  report  violations  of  their  electoral  rights;  and  the  Public Prosecutor’s Office for citizens and civil society organizations to report any suspicion of criminal activity related to the elections.
According to these institutions, very few calls were received and none concerned serious violations.
The Public Prosecutor received 28 reports or complaints of which 14 were referred to the relevant basic public prosecutor’s office with instructions to act urgently and report back.
No grounds of suspicion of criminal activity were found in the remaining allegations.
The public prosecutor informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that it will keep the hotline open for reports of electoral irregularities and will continue to investigate cases that were already reported.
XIII.
PARTICIPATION OF NATIONAL MINORITIES  Inter-ethnic relations remain a relevant factor in the politics of the country and political parties tend to mainly reach out to their own communities.64 Inter-ethnic issues did not, however, feature prominently in the on-going political crisis, and relations among communities were not the focus of political confrontation.
Smaller communities expressed concern to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM about not being involved in international and domestic efforts to find a way out of the political crisis.
They also claimed that parties representing larger communities use administrative resources and public employment to ensure support from minorities.
Parties representing smaller communities also complained about lack of access to media.
Parties  representing  the  ethnic-Albanian  community,  and  particularly  DUI,  were  decisive  in initiating and finalising the process which led to 5 June elections being cancelled.
Other parties representing smaller communities were more divided in their position.
Those that had joined the VMRO-DPMNE-led coalition were ready to participate in the elections, while other parties stated to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that conditions for credible elections were not present and they would therefore boycott the elections.
Members of minority communities and parties representing them, particularly the ethnic-Albanians, participated in protests across the country, individually, with other communities and as part of the Protestiram movement.
In some areas, the protest had an inter-ethnic character, with symbols of the country’s  flag  and  of  the  ethnic-Albanian  and  Roma  community  displayed  together.
A demonstration organized by the Albanian Opposition Council, in which the party Levizja Besa plays a primary role, attracted a large number of supporters, advancing demands for the ethnic-Albanian community and accusing DUI of not adequately representing the community’s interests.
Almost  all  representatives  of  national  minorities,  particularly  those  of  smaller  communities, advocated to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM the introduction of a single nationwide electoral district, as well as the creation of other special measures to promote national minorities, including reserved seats.
In their view, these measures would allow parties representing smaller communities to run separately and not necessarily align with existing coalitions.
Several OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors shared their concerns that the Roma community may be susceptible  to  political  pressure  and  selling  and  buying  of  votes.
At  the  same  time,  the OSCE/ODHIR EOM was informed of numerous initiatives aimed at raising awareness within the same community, which in some cases reportedly resulted in curbing such practice.
XIV.
RECOMMENDATIONS  These recommendations, as contained throughout the text, are offered with a view to enhance the conduct of elections in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and to support efforts to bring them fully in line with OSCE commitments and other international obligations and standards for democratic  elections.
These  recommendations  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  past OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, in particular from the 2014 Final Report, which remain to be addressed.
The OSCE/ODIHR stands ready to assist the authorities to further improve the electoral process and to address the recommendations contained in this and previous reports.65  A.
PRIORITY RECOMMENDATIONS  1.
The Electoral Code would benefit from a complete review in order to harmonize it internally and with other relevant laws.
The review should be conducted after consultations between all political stakeholders and relevant civil society organizations.
It should be completed well in advance of the next elections.
Training for electoral staff and public awareness programmes should be undertaken to enhance the effective implementation of the Code.
2.
As required by law and in order to increase transparency and public confidence in its work, all SEC sessions should be open to public; all SEC decisions should be published on their website without delay.
3.
The SEC and MoIA should continue the process of updating of voter register though a co-ordinated effort according to clear responsibilities and procedures.
Adequate resources and time should be allocated to accomplish this task before the next elections.
This process should be transparent and ensure access to political parties and civil society.
It should be accompanied by a public information campaign in order to increase the citizens’ confidence in the accuracy of voter registration.
4.
The allocation of state advertisements should be done in a transparent, objective and non-discriminatory manner, including by providing detailed information on the substance and funds for such advertisements.
5.
The Electoral Code should be harmonized with the Constitution and state clearly that all hearings on election related cases should be held in public and that decisions are made public immediately.
B.
OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS  Legal Framework  6.
A review of the Electoral Code could consider including provisions to regulate the situation where only one electoral contestant is running for parliamentary elections.
Electoral System   7.
If the current out-of-country voting system is maintained, alternative provisions should be made for voters to exercise their right to vote if voting abroad is cancelled.
8.
To ensure equality of the vote, legislation could foresee periodic review of district boundaries by an independent body.
When district boundaries are redefined, it should be done in a timely, transparent, impartial and inclusive manner.
Election Administration  9.
To ensure sustainability of the SEC administrative capacity, all necessary support positions should be permanent, based on open and competitive recruitment.
10.
Consideration should be given to establishing and ensuring a more efficient communication and support from SEC to local election management bodies.
Comprehensive and standardized training for SEC local officials and MEC members should be undertaken before new elections are called.
The local offices should be provided with the necessary resources for conducting their work in a timely and effective manner.
Voter Registration  11.
To  increase  public  confidence  and  provide  easier  access  of  voters  to  verify  voter  lists, consideration could be given to displaying printed excerpts of voter lists at locations convenient to voters, possibly at polling stations.
Candidate Registration  12.
As previously recommended, consideration could be given to providing alternative methods for signature collection in order to reduce the potential for intimidation.
13.
To avoid any confusion and the rejection of candidate list for technical reasons, all specific documents required for each list could be enumerated in the Electoral Code.
Campaign  14.
Citizens, including public or state employees, should not be subject to pressure or intimidation.
Authorities should actively encourage citizens to report any cases of pressure, supported by verifiable evidence.
Any  instances and allegations of pressure  and intimidation should be thoroughly and effectively investigated and prosecuted by authorities.
Campaign Finance  15.
Monitoring  and  supervision  of  campaign  finance  provisions  should  be  carried  out  by  an independent agency that has the necessary personnel and expertise to effectively monitor for irregularities.
Should that be the SAO, they should be provided with the adequate powers and resources.
Media  16.
It is recommended to replace the legal requirement of MRT for exact amount of time in every newscast devoted to the coverage of campaign activities of individual parties with a more general requirement requiring impartiality and balance while respecting editorial independence of the public broadcaster.
17.
To guarantee equitable coverage and access for all political contestants, the broadcast media should ensure balance in their news and current affairs reporting in the pre-campaign period, as required by the law.
Complaints and appeals  18.
To  ensure  effective  remedy,  all  election-related  cases  should  be  decided  within  timely deadlines clearly stated in the law.
19.
To allow effective legal remedy, the SEC should develop permanent instructions on complaints and  appeals  process.
Such  regulations  could  be  harmonized  with  the  new  complaint management system.
ANNEX II:   LIST OF OBSERVERS IN THE IN ELECTION OBSERVATION MISSION  OSCE/ODIHR EOM Core Team   Jan       Petersen     Norway    Head of Mission Jasmina     Fracassetti    Croatia Laszlo      Belagyi    Hungary Alessandro     Rotta      Italy Alexandra     Pajevic          Montenegro Konrad     Olszewski    Poland Pawel      Jurczak    Poland Tomasz     Janczy     Poland Raul       Muresan    Romania Yury       Ozerov     Russian Federation Iegor       Tilpunov     Ukraine Donald      Bisson     United States    OSCE/ODIHR EOM Long-Term Observers  Suad       Salkic     Bosnia and Herzegovina Tereza      Ambrozova    Czech Republic Karen Benedikte   Skipper    Denmark Irmeli Maria     Vieno      Finland Sylvain     Ollier      France Andreas     Kunert     Germany Christa     Mueller     Germany Julia Franziska   Ruppel     Germany Cecilia Rose     Keaveney    Ireland Alessandro     Gori      Italy  Catharina Maria   Appel      Netherlands Servatius     Wiemers    Netherlands Per N.      Svartefoss    Norway Cristian     Negrila    Romania Elof David     Dahmen    Sweden Vida Koren     Holm      Sweden Sascha Michel   Alderisi    Switzerland Monica Angela   Giambonini    Switzerland Anna       Galan      Ukraine Roger      Bryant     United Kingdom Joan       Pearce     United Kingdom Nicholas     Alexander    United States Andral     Bratton    United States  Sheila      Jaghab     United States       ABOUT THE OSCE/ODIHR  The Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) is the OSCE’s principal institution to assist participating States “to ensure full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, to abide by the rule of law, to promote principles of democracy and (…) to build, strengthen and protect democratic institutions, as well as promote tolerance throughout society” (1992 Helsinki Summit Document).
This is referred to as the OSCE human dimension.
The OSCE/ODIHR, based in Warsaw (Poland) was created as the Office for Free Elections at the 1990 Paris Summit and started operating in May 1991.
One year later, the name of the Office was changed to reflect an expanded mandate to include human rights and democratization.
Today it employs over 130 staff.
The OSCE/ODIHR is the lead agency in Europe in the field of election observation.
Every year, it co-ordinates and organizes the deployment of thousands of observers to assess whether elections in the OSCE region are conducted in line with OSCE Commitments, other international standards for democratic elections and national legislation.
Its unique methodology provides an in-depth insight into the electoral process in its entirety.
Through assistance projects, the OSCE/ODIHR helps participating States to improve their electoral framework.
The  Office’s  democratization  activities  include:  rule  of  law,  legislative  support,  democratic governance,  migration  and  freedom  of  movement,  and  gender  equality.
The  OSCE/ODIHR implements a number of targeted assistance programs annually, seeking to develop democratic structures.
The OSCE/ODIHR also assists participating States in fulfilling their obligations to promote and protect  human  rights  and  fundamental  freedoms  consistent  with  OSCE  human  dimension commitments.
This is achieved by working with a variety of partners to foster collaboration, build capacity  and  provide  expertise  in  thematic  areas  including  human  rights  in  the  fight  against terrorism, enhancing the human rights protection of trafficked persons, human rights education and training, human rights monitoring and reporting, and women’s human rights and security.
Within the field of tolerance and non-discrimination, the OSCE/ODIHR provides support to the participating  States  in  strengthening  their  response  to  hate  crimes  and  incidents  of  racism, xenophobia, anti-Semitism and other forms of intolerance.
The OSCE/ODIHR's activities related to tolerance and non-discrimination are focused on the following areas: legislation; law enforcement training; monitoring, reporting on, and following up on responses to hate-motivated crimes and incidents; as well as educational activities to promote tolerance, respect, and mutual understanding.
The OSCE/ODIHR provides advice to participating States on their policies on Roma and Sinti.
It promotes capacity-building and networking among Roma and Sinti communities, and encourages the participation of Roma and Sinti representatives in policy-making bodies.
All  ODIHR  activities  are  carried  out  in  close  co-ordination  and  co-operation  with  OSCE participating States, OSCE institutions and field operations, as well as with other international organizations.
More information is available on the ODIHR website (www.osce.org/odihr).

