OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
Election Observation Mission
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Early Parliamentary Elections, 5 June 2016
INTERIM REPORT
31 March – 19 April 2016
22 April 2016
I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
On 15 April, early parliamentary elections were officially called for 5 June.
The main opposition party and some 20 smaller parties have announced their intention to boycott the elections, arguing that key Przino Agreement conditions had not been met, specifically cleaning of the voter register, media reforms and separation of party and state activities.
The political climate deteriorated after 12 April, when President Ivanov pardoned all those charged, under investigation and suspected in the so-called “wiretapping scandal”.
All of the major political parties condemned the pardon and called on the president to rescind his decision.
The Electoral Code was substantially amended in November 2015.
While these amendments address most of the previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendations and represent an effort to improve the Code, a number of OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors stressed that full implementation of the Code is of equal importance.
Some noted that late changes may negatively affect electoral stakeholders’ understanding of how to fulfill their functions.
The new composition of the State Election Commission (SEC) comprises three independent experts, including its president and deputy, in addition to the six political nominees.
Of the nine SEC members, two are women and three are ethnic Albanians.
The SEC is working in a tense political environment and its long sessions attract significant media attention.
On 15 April, the SEC voted that they were prepared to conduct “fair and democratic elections”.
The SEC president and two opposition representatives refused to take part in this vote.
The SEC now carries sole responsibility for maintaining the voter register.
In February, the SEC started the process of cleaning the voter register by cross-checking various databases, as well as by conducting field verifications.
OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors stated that the process was complex, methodologically challenging and requiring major resources.
While the legal framework provides for equitable treatment of political parties by media, most OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors raised concerns regarding the deterioration of media freedom due to political pressure and media owners interfering in the work of journalists.
They also highlighted the need for substantial reforms.
On 4 April, the parliament dismissed draft amendments to the media legislation put forward by a coalition of civil society organizations.
The citizen observer organizations MOST and CIVIL announced their intention to observe the elections.
On 5 April, the Financial Police began an investigation of MOST activities, and some OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors questioned the timing of this inquiry.
II. INTRODUCTION
Following an official invitation, and based on the recommendation of a Needs Assessment Mission conducted from 2 to 5 November 2015, the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) established an Election Observation Mission (EOM) on 31 March to observe the 5 June early parliamentary elections.
The EOM, headed by Ambassador Jan Petersen, consists of a 12-member core team based in Skopje and 24 long-term observers (LTOs) deployed throughout the country on 13 April.
Mission members are drawn from 21 OSCE participating States.
Participating States have been requested to second 300 short-term observers to observe election day procedures.
III. BACKGROUND AND POLITICAL CONTEXT
The last parliamentary elections were held on 27 April 2014 and resulted in a government formed by a coalition of Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization – Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity (VMRO-DPMNE) with 61 seats, and Democratic Union for Integration (DUI) with 19 seats.
The opposition included the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM) with 34 seats and the Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) with 7 seats.
The National Democratic Revival (NDR) and Citizens Option for Macedonia (GROM) had one seat each.
Following the elections, SDSM refused to take up their mandates and boycotted the work of the parliament alleging that the elections were not legitimate due to electoral fraud, intimidation of citizens and inadequate separation of state and party activities.
The political crisis deepened in February 2015 with the so-called “wiretapping scandal”, when incriminating wiretapped recordings allegedly implicated government and public officials in corruption, election fraud and abuse of power were released and led to a series of large-scale protests.
Representatives of the European Commission and the European Parliament facilitated a political agreement between the four major parties resulting in the signing of the Przino Agreement on 2 June and a Protocol on 15 July.
The Agreement called for a “transitional period” followed by early parliamentary elections on 24 April 2016.
An interim government was installed on 11 November, followed by the resignation of the prime minister on 15 January 2016.
SDSM announced in the beginning of 2016 that they would not participate in the elections scheduled for 24 April, stating that key Przino Agreement conditions had not been met, specifically cleaning of the voter register, media reforms, and separation of state and party activities.
On 23 February, the European Union (EU) and United States (US) ambassadors to Skopje released a joint assessment concluding that although some progress had been made, conditions for organizing credible elections were not in place.
The same day, the parliament approved a DUI motion to postpone the dissolution of the parliament until 7 April.
A day before the scheduled dissolution of the parliament, SDSM announced their intention to withdraw their representatives from the interim government; this matter was not, however, put on the parliamentary agenda.
On 7 April parliament was dissolved, and on 15 April the parliament speaker called elections for 5 June.
SDSM, along with 13 parties signed a Platform for a Democratic Macedonia calling for the implementation of Przino Agreement and announced a boycott of these elections.
The political climate deteriorated after 12 April, when President Gjorge Ivanov issued a blanket pardon to all individuals who were charged, under investigation or suspected of involvement in the wiretap scandal.
All of the major political parties condemned the pardon and called on the president to rescind his decision.
The pardon triggered protests and counter protests, some violent.
These recent events have further exacerbated the tense and uncertain political situation and increased the exchange of harsh rhetoric between all parties, and particularly between VMRO-DPMNE and SDSM.
IV. LEGAL FRAMEWORK AND ELECTORAL SYSTEM
The elections are regulated by the Constitution and the Electoral Code, supplemented by regulations promulgated by the State Election Commission (SEC).
The Electoral Code was adopted in 2006 but has undergone a number of changes since then.
Following the Przino Agreement, a working group was created with the participation of VMRO-DPMNE, SDSM, DUI and DPA.
The group reached consensus on electoral reform in November 2015, and on 9 November the parliament adopted a significant number of amendments.
The amendments addressed most of the prior OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, particularly those related to the principle of equal suffrage for out-of-country voting, the composition and competences of the SEC, level playing field in terms of media coverage during the election period, strengthening party and campaign finance reporting and auditing, improving safeguards for the separation of party and state, introducing deadlines for courts to decide on electoral disputes and clarifying the definition of campaigning and campaign period.
While the amendments represent an effort to improve the Electoral Code, a number of OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors stressed that full implementation of the Code is of equal importance.
They also expressed the opinion that late changes may negatively affect electoral stakeholders’ understanding of new provisions and impact on their ability to fulfill their functions.
Between 120 and 123 members of parliament (MPs) will be elected under a proportional representation system, using closed lists.
Of these, 20 MPs will be elected in each of the 6 in-country electoral districts with similar number of voters.
As a result of the 2015 amendments to the Electoral Code, up to 3 MPs can be elected from a single out-of-country district.
V. ELECTION ADMINISTRATION
Elections are administered by the SEC, 80 Municipal Election Commissions (MECs), and some 3,500 Electoral Boards (EBs), including 53 abroad.
Following the Przino Agreement, the SEC composition was increased from seven to nine members, including three independent experts selected by the parliament in an open recruitment process.
Ruling and opposition party blocs in the parliament nominated three additional members each.
The new SEC was appointed by the parliament on 16 December 2015, five month later than called for in the Przino Agreement.
The SEC president and his deputy were elected from among the non-partisan members.
MECs are composed of five members who are randomly selected by the SEC from employees of the state and municipal administration.
As the mandate of current MECs expires on 28 April, the SEC should appoint new MECs by the same date.
EBs comprise five members – three randomly selected public employees and two appointees of the main ruling and opposition parties.
A submitter of the list of candidates has the right to appoint an observer to each election administration body.
The Electoral Code provides for equitable representation of ethnic groups and each gender in election administration bodies.
Of the nine SEC members, two are women and three are ethnic Albanians.
While by law all sessions should be public, the SEC also convened in working meetings closed for media and observers.
The SEC is working in a tense political environment and its long sessions attract significant media attention.
On 15 April, after a discussion between SEC and the US and EU ambassadors, the SEC publicly discussed and voted with six votes in favour that they were prepared to conduct “fair and democratic elections”.
The SEC president and the two SDSM representatives refused to vote and left the meeting.
VI. VOTER REGISTRATION
All citizens over the age of 18 years are eligible to vote unless disenfranchised by a final court decision.
Voter registration is passive, with the exception of voters temporarily residing abroad who must actively register.
Voting rights are granted to persons with a registered residence in the country who have a biometric identification card or passport.
The accuracy of the voter register remains one of the most contentious issues in the ongoing political crisis.
Following the 2015 changes to the Electoral Code, the SEC carries sole responsibility for maintaining voter register based on data extracted from civil and population registers.
In February, the SEC started the cleaning of the voter register by cross-checking the databases of 11 state institutions, as well as by conducting field verifications.
OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors stated that the process proved complex, methodologically challenging as well as requiring major resources.
Out of approximately 1.8 million voters, some 330,000 were identified as needing clarification of their status.
The SEC searched for inconsistencies in the databases and analyzed data that could indicate possible irregularities, such as deceased persons remaining on the lists, large number of voters registered at the same addresses or voters with similar names and birthdays.
Some 220,000 records were forwarded for additional clarifications to the MoIA and several other state institutions.
The SEC published a list of some 89,000 citizens whose registration data were to be confirmed during field visits at voters’ residence between 28 March and 5 April.
Following an intervention by the Directorate for Personal Data Protection on 30 March, the SEC removed this list from its website, along with the national list with voters’ addresses.
Over 550 SEC representatives visited the households of some 87,000 voters, filling out questionnaires that were later uploaded in the SEC database.
Some 35,000 voters were met in person, and 41,000 were not present but their data was checked.
Over 10,000 forms did not indicate if a voter was met in person or not.
The SEC removed over 1,100 deceased persons from the voter register and is currently awaiting a response from the MoIA regarding thousands of remaining records.
The cleaning of the voter register will continue in the electoral period.
The voter lists are expected to be posted for public scrutiny from 25 April, and political parties will be able to challenge any records.
For the first time in these elections, on election day voters’ photo should be placed on the voter lists.
VII. CANDIDATE REGISTRATION
Any eligible voter can be a candidate, except those who have been sentenced by a final court decision to more than six months imprisonment and did not complete their sentence.
The law also identifies a range of government and government-related positions that are incompatible with candidacy.
Candidates can be nominated by political parties, coalitions of political parties, or by groups of voters.
Candidate lists submitted by groups of voters are required to provide at least 1,000 supporting signatures of voters residing in the respective district.
In line with a previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendation, a voter can now sign in support of more than one prospective contestant, however, signatures must be collected in front of a regional SEC representative.
Candidate lists should be submitted to the SEC not later than 11 May with the candidate registration process to conclude by 13 May.
In an effort to encourage the participation of women, the Electoral Code now provides that at least 40 percent of candidates must belong to the less represented gender.
VIII. CAMPAIGN AND CAMPAIGN FINANCE
The official election campaign will begin on 16 May, and will end 24 hours before election day.
Following previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, the use of administrative resources for campaigning, including the use of office premises, office equipment and official vehicles is explicitly prohibited.
The Code now forbids pressuring or intimidating voters and obliges all electoral contestants to sign a Code on Fair and Democratic Elections as a guarantee.
Displaying campaign posters free of charge is allowed only at locations determined by each municipality.
Posters can be posted on private buildings only with the permission of the owner.
While most forms of campaigning are not allowed until 16 May, political advertising on billboards and advertising panels is permitted.
The political parties have the right to rent advertising panels and billboards in a transparent manner.
The Electoral Code regulates the financing of election campaigns.
All campaign-related donations and expenditures must go through a bank account.
Eligible private persons are allowed to donate up to the equivalent of EUR 3,000 in MKD, while legal entities may donate up to EUR 30,000.
Foreign or anonymous donations, as well as those from state-owned, religious and charitable organizations, are prohibited.
Discounts given by media outlets to campaign participants for political advertisements are considered donations.
Each electoral contestant may not spend more than EUR 1.80 (MKD 110) per registered voter in a given electoral district.
Electoral contestants have to submit two interim reports and a final campaign finance report.
In line with previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, itemized reporting on campaign finance expenditure is now required.
The supervision of campaign finance is primarily carried out by the State Audit Office.
IX. MEDIA
The media is composed of a high number of outlets, and television remains the predominant source of news and information.
OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors raised concerns regarding the deterioration of media freedom due to political pressure and owners interfering in the work of journalists.
They also highlighted the need for substantial reforms.
The OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media also called on the authorities “to ease the pressure on media and respect free and critical voices”.
The Constitution, Law on Media and Law on Audio and Audiovisual Media Service form the legal framework for the media, which requires equal treatment of political parties.
In addition, the amended Electoral Code obliges broadcast media to cover elections in a fair, balanced and unbiased manner, providing contestants with equitable access.
Strict rules governing news coverage and reporting on regular activities of state and municipal institutions during the campaign are also introduced.
As part of the Przino Agreement, consultations between the four political parties and civil society organizations were held to further reform the media landscape, however amendments coming from civil society organizations were dismissed by the parliament on 4 April.
The Agency for Audio and Audiovisual Media Services (AVMS), the broadcast media regulatory body, is required to conduct media monitoring of broadcast and Internet media outlets during the electoral period.
Due to the lack of a clear definition of the Internet portals in the Electoral Code, the AVMS does not intend to monitor such media.
While during the pre-campaign period the AVMS only monitors national broadcasters and checks the regional and local media outlets only in case of complaints, it will monitor all broadcast media once the campaign starts.
The Council of Media Ethics (CME), operating since early 2015, is a self–regulatory body that reviews complaints about media content.
On 12 February, most private media outlets signed CME’s “Charter on Ethical Reporting during Elections”, pledging to report in a balanced, truthful, impartial and objective manner.
Earlier in January, the public broadcaster Macedonian Radio and Television (MRT), has also adopted “Ethical and Professional Principles of MRT for Media Coverage of the Election Process”, establishing the general guidelines for the journalists to cover the elections.
On 7 April, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM commenced qualitative and quantitative media monitoring of eight television channels and five daily newspapers.
X. COMPLAINTS AND APPEALS
Election related complaints may be filed by authorized representatives of candidates, by submitters of candidates’ lists as well as by voters.
The complaints are heard by the SEC, and its decisions can be appealed to the Administrative Court.
Decisions of the Administrative Court are final.
Following previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, the 2015 amendments to the Electoral Code adjusted the deadlines for hearing and deciding electoral complaints.
In addition, all hearings must be open to the public.
Decisions on complaints should be published on the websites of the Administrative Court and the SEC.
To date no complaints have been filed with the SEC or the Administrative Court.
In line with previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, the SEC established a legal department for handling complaints.
In addition, the Electoral Code calls for the establishment of a system for case and complaint management that is yet to be operational.
XI. PARTICIPATION OF NATIONAL MINORITIES
Inter-ethnic relations remain a relevant factor in the politics of the country, and political parties tend to mainly reach out to their own communities.
Traditionally, parties representing the Albanian community ran separately, whereas parties representing smaller communities aligned with stronger political forces in pre-election coalitions.
These smaller communities expressed concern to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM about not being involved in negotiations on the Przino Agreement.
They also claimed that parties representing larger communities use administrative resources and public employment to ensure support from minorities.
After the dissolution of the parliament, VMRO-DPMNE began forming a coalition, including some parties representing minorities.
Other such parties stated to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that there are no conditions for credible elections, and as such they would not take part.
The Electoral Code provides for specific rights for minorities.
In municipalities where ethnic communities constitute at least 20 per cent of the population, they should be represented in MECs and EBs, and all templates and election materials, including the ballot, should also be available in the their language.
In districts where at least 20 per cent of the citizens speak one of six officially recognized minority languages, candidate lists may also be submitted in this language.
XII. CITIZEN AND INTERNATIONAL OBSERVERS
The Electoral Code provides for international and citizen election observation.
The citizen observer organizations MOST and CIVIL have announced their intention to observe these elections.
At this stage, MOST has 80 observers in 18 regional offices, and CIVIL has 35 observers in 14 regional offices as well as 12 mobile observers.
On 5 April, the Financial Police began an investigation of MOST regarding out-of-country payments to foreign consultants, and some OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors questioned the timing of this investigation.
XIII. MISSION ACTIVITIES
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM commenced its work in Skopje on 31 March.
The Head of Mission met with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the SEC, and with representatives of political parties, the OSCE Mission to Skopje and the international community.
The EOM established contacts with electoral stakeholders at all levels.
The OSCE Parliamentary Assembly (OSCE PA) and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) intend to deploy observer delegations for election day observation.
The English version of this report is the only official document.
An unofficial translation is available in Macedonian and Albanian languages.
OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
Election Observation Mission
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Early Parliamentary Elections, 5 June 2016
INTERIM REPORT 2
20 April - 11 May 2016
13 May 2016
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The coalition of the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization – Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity Party and two non-parliamentary parties submitted candidate lists to compete in these elections.
Three other parties that are signatories of the Przino Agreement call for the postponement of elections.
The political atmosphere in the country remains tense.
While the opposition and some civil society organizations are demanding a postponement of elections and calling for an increased involvement of the international community in resolving the crisis, counter-demonstrations call for elections to be held on 5 June.
All demonstrations are generally peaceful, but several arrests were made for damages caused to state buildings and monuments.
The OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation Mission (EOM) received credible allegations of pressure on public sector employees to attend the counter-demonstrations, no official complaints, however, have been filed.
The State Election Commission (SEC) continues to work in a very tense political environment.
As of 15 April, the two members nominated by SDSM have not participated in the SEC sessions.
Despite a legal obligation to meet publicly, the SEC held two closed sessions, and its decisions have not been systematically published on its website.
Many SEC regional offices complained about lack of resources and insufficient support from the headquarters.
On 28 April, the SEC appointed new members to the Municipal Election Commissions (MECs), ensuring the minimum gender and ethnic minority representation required by the law.
Of the four main parliamentary parties, it appears that only the ruling party nominated its members to the Electoral Boards (EB).
As a number of MECs are not yet operational, the appointment of EB members is delayed by several days.
Alleged irregularities in the voter list, such as fictitious voters and other fraudulent practices, are used as one of the main arguments for the postponement of the elections.
The 26 April SEC progress report on updating voter lists did not reveal evidence of voter registration fraud to date.
Some 1.8 million voters could check only their own data electronically, but not that of other citizens as required by law.
The SEC has not published the voter lists online, due to a decision of the Directorate for Personal Data Protection.
Upon a SEC appeal, the Administrative Court is yet to decide on the matter.
The first monitoring report of the Agency for Audio and Audiovisual Media Services concluded that private broadcasters Alfa, Kanal 5, Kanal 5+, Sitel and Nova have so far failed to provide objective, equitable and unbiased coverage.
It further concluded that the first four media listed above co-ordinated their editorial policy.
The preliminary OSCE/ODIHR EOM media monitoring data shows that public MRT-1 so far provided limited information about political events.
Public MRT-2 and Alsat-M provided more coverage to the Albanian parties.
While private Sitel, Kanal 5 and Alfa show bias for VMRO-DPMNE and against SDSM, private Telma and Vesti 24 are more balanced.
No official complaints have been filed to date to SEC or courts.
Hotlines for reporting electoral violations have been established by several state institutions.
POLITICAL CONTEXT AND PRE-CAMPAIGN ENVIRONMENT
The political atmosphere in the country remains tense.
The Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization – Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity Party (VMRO-DPMNE) maintains that holding elections on 5 June is the only way out of the current political crisis, while Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM) calls for postponement of elections until the Przino Agreement is fully implemented.
The Democratic Union for Integration (DUI) and Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) stated that they stand for inclusive elections with all parties running.
A number of OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors call for an increased involvement of the international community in resolving the crisis.
A 22 April attempt by the European Union and United States to mediate the political crisis was met by an announcement by the SDSM that they would not participate in talks until the presidential pardon related to the wire-tapping scandal is withdrawn and the elections are postponed.
Discussions continue as the 11 May deadline for candidate nomination has passed and a number of parties will not participate in the elections, including SDSM, DUI and DPA.
Demonstrations and counter-demonstrations continue in Skopje and numerous other cities.
The civil movement Protestiram (I protest) mainly calls for postponement of elections, withdrawal of presidential pardon and resignation of the president.
The demonstrations have been generally peaceful, however, several arrests were made after state buildings and monuments were splattered with paint.
While the Protestiram representatives maintain their independence from any political party, VMRO-DPMNE claims that the protests are orchestrated by SDSM.
Counter-demonstrations organized by Civil Movement for Defense (GDOM) support the government position by calling for elections to be held on 5 June.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM received credible allegations of pressure on public sector employees to attend the counter-demonstrations, including threats of loss of employment, however no official complaints have been filed.
Several OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors attributed this to a culture of fear of retribution existing in state companies and institutions.
The new Electoral Code allows for the use of billboards and advertising panels for political advertising as of 20 December 2015.
However, many municipalities appeared not to be aware of the new provisions and the SEC has yet to allocate the space.
THE ELECTION ADMINISTRATION
The State Election Commission (SEC) began administrative preparations for elections and adopted an electoral calendar with legal deadlines as well as a budget for administering elections.
The SEC has held regular sessions with only seven members, as the two members nominated by the SDSM have not participated in the public sessions since 15 April.
Despite a legal obligation, the SEC held two sessions without inviting media and observers.
In addition, its formal decisions were not systematically published on its website.
The SEC continues to work in a very tense political environment and under criticism from the opposition and some civil society organizations who claim there are no conditions for holding elections on 5 June.
Civil society organizations MOST and CIVIL criticized the SEC for “failing to clean the voter lists” and to “provide conditions for fair and credible elections”.
In a public session, SEC rejected these allegations and some of its members accused both organizations of links with the SDSM.
The employees of the SEC regional offices visited by OSCE/ODIHR EOM appear to be experienced and committed to their work, but many of them complained about the lack of necessary resources and insufficient support received from the headquarters.
As the four-year mandate of Municipal Election Commissions (MECs) expired on 28 April, the SEC appointed new MEC members.
Selection was done randomly from among civil servants through a computer programme.
The minimum gender and ethnic minority representation required by the law was largely respected.
Among selected, 47 per cent of MEC members are women.
It appears that a number of MECs are not yet operational.
As the appointment of their members was not harmonized with the calendar of the 2016 elections, new members did not receive any training before commencing their duties.
In addition, OSCE/ODIHR EOM was informed that some new members were not aware of their appointments.
Some 40 MEC members requested the SEC to cancel their selection for health reasons, political party affiliation or lack of necessary education.
By the 5 May deadline, it appears that out of the four main parliamentary parties only VMRO-DPMNE nominated its representatives to the Election Boards (EB).
The appointment of EB members was due by the next day, but the EBs were not appointed in most MECs.
VOTER REGISTRATION
After a three-month effort to clean the voter register, alleged irregularities, such as fictitious voters and other fraudulent practices, are still used as one of the main arguments for the postponement of the elections.
The 26 April SEC progress report on updating voter lists did not reveal evidence of voter registration fraud to date.
Almost all of the 300,000 records initially identified as questionable were validated.
Minor changes were made, mainly by removing deceased persons.
The SEC conducted an additional check of electronic databases of some 47,000 voters who were not met in person during the field verification conducted between 28 March and 5 April.
This led to minor changes in the register.
The SEC is conducting further research of some 4,100 voters whose status was questioned as a result of an online verification.
Many OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors, including some SEC regional staff, raised doubts about the usefulness of the field checks in general.
In response to 45 SEC written requests, the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MoIA) submitted verified citizen records.
Many of these requests were, however, signed only by the deputy minister, as the minister, representing SDSM, refused to do so with the argument that more time was needed to conduct accurate checks.
While the SDSM representatives at the SEC questioned the legality of such documents, the SEC decided to accept them.
In addition, the MoIA minister requested the SEC to remove some 130,000 voters who possess a passport but not a valid identification card, which he claimed is necessary to prove their residency.
The SEC rejected this request on the ground that law provides for registration of voters with either valid identification card or passport.
An ongoing concern for the SEC is the so called ‘Pustec voters’: citizens living in Albania whose voter eligibility remains in question because of unclear residency status.
These persons were allegedly added to the voter lists in Skopje Centar municipality to influence the outcome of local elections.
According to MoIA representatives, some 349 identification cards were cancelled for the reason of respective voters not having the right to register at that specific residence.
As required by the law, the public inspection of voter lists, comprising some 1.8 million voters, was conducted between 25 April and 9 May at SEC’s 34 regional and local offices.
Neither paper excerpts of the voter lists nor databases were available for voters to check the registration data of other citizens.
Instead, voters could check only their own data.
This, however, was not implemented uniformly across the country: while in some offices they could do so by their personal identification number, in others this was possible also by their name, address and polling station number.
As of 9 May, 4,700 voters verified the accuracy of their data.
The SEC has not published the voter lists on its website as required by law, due to the decision of the Directorate for Personal Data Protection prohibiting the publication of personal data of voters including name, gender, address, date of birth and polling station number.
The SEC has appealed the decision to the Administrative Court,16 which is yet to decide on the matter.
On 14 May, the SEC must share the voter lists with the political parties, which will have five days to request any changes.
The voter list update is scheduled to conclude on 22 May.
REGISTRATION OF CANDIDATES
The deadline for the submission of candidate lists was 11 May.
Of the four major parliamentary parties, only the VMRO-DPMNE coalition submitted candidate lists.
In addition, two non-parliamentary parties, the National Movement for Macedonia and the Social Democratic Party of Macedonia, nominated their candidates.
No independent lists were submitted by groups of citizens.
The SEC is to verify submitted lists for candidate eligibility and required gender representation.
Candidate registration will conclude by 14 May, and SEC decisions of non-registration can be appealed with the Administrative Court.
THE MEDIA
The Agency for Audio and Audiovisual Media Services (AVMS) is monitoring the broadcast media during the electoral period.
On 28 April, the Agency released the first report focusing on national broadcasters covering the first 10 days of this period.
The report concluded that private broadcasters Alfa, Kanal 5, Kanal 5+, Sitel and Nova failed to provide objective and unbiased coverage of the events as prescribed by Article 61 of the Law on Audio and Audiovisual Media services.
The report also concluded that the first four media listed above co-ordinated their editorial policy.
The Electoral Code requires the public broadcaster to organize debates between the ruling and the opposition parties.
MRT-1 attempted to hold two debates between VMRO-DPMNE, SDSM, DUI and DPA, but only VMRO-DPMNE chose to participate and only once.
MRT-1 also organized one debate between Citizens Option for Macedonia and Socialist Party of Macedonia, where New Social Democratic Party and Liberal Democratic Party chose not to participate despite having been invited.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM continues qualitative and quantitative media monitoring of eight television channels and five daily newspapers.
The preliminary OSCE/ODIHR EOM media monitoring data for the period from 15 April to 11 May show that public television MRT-1 devotes most coverage to government activities, followed by reports on the VMRO-DPMNE and SDSM.
All other political parties received marginal coverage.
The Albanian language service of MRT-2 and private Alsat-M provided more coverage of the Albanian parties, particularly DUI.
Between 15 April and 11 May, the most popular private stations Sitel and Kanal 5, together with Alfa, displayed a similar approach in the news coverage, devoting most time to VMRO-DPMNE, SDSM and government.
The coverage tone was mainly positive and neutral for VMRO-DPMNE and for the counter-protests, and mainly negative of SDSM and protests calling postponement of elections.
Telma and Vesti 24 have so far provided equal coverage to VMRO-DPMNE and SDSM.
The electoral contestants are entitled to purchase paid political advertisements for the official campaign period.
The AVMS has informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that in total 107 broadcasters have published the pricelists, while 24 broadcasters informed AVMS that they will not sell political advertisements.
In addition, 7 newspapers and 12 web portals have submitted their pricelists.
COMPLAINTS AND APPEALS
The SEC is yet to adopt an instruction for deciding on complaints and appeals.
The electronic system for case and complaint management required by the Electoral Code has not been developed so far.
To date no official complaints have been received by the SEC or the courts.
Hotlines have been established by several state institutions: the Ministry of Information Society and Administration for public sector employees to report any pressure on them related to the elections;20 the Ombudsman Office for citizens to report violations of their electoral rights; and the Public Prosecutor’s Office for citizens and civil society organizations to report any suspicion of criminal activity related to the elections.
According to these institutions, very few calls have been received and none of them concerning serious violations.
The Public Prosecutor received 16 allegations or complaints of which 2 were referred to the relevant basic public prosecutor’s office with instructions to act urgently and report back.
No grounds of suspicion of criminal activity were found in the remaining allegations.
PARTICIPATION OF NATIONAL MINORITIES
Interethnic issues are not a prominent factor in the current political crisis.
Members of minority communities and parties representing them, particularly the ethnic Albanians, have been participating in protests across the country, individually, with other communities and as part of the Protestiram movement.
The so-called non-parliamentary bloc of smaller Albanian parties (DPA- Reform, National Democratic Revival and BESA) also joined the demonstrations.
In some areas such as Tetovo, the protest had an inter-ethnic character, with symbols of the country’s flag and of the Albanian and Roma community displayed together.
Parties representing the Roma community and civil society organizations advocating for their rights have shared their concerns with the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that the community may be susceptible to political pressure and selling and buying of votes.
MISSION ACTIVITIES
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM continued its regular activities, meeting state officials, party representatives, the election administration, court officials, media and civil society representatives, and diplomatic missions.
OSCE/ODIHR EOM LTOs continue to observe electoral preparations in the regions and are preparing for the deployment of short-term observers.
A briefing for members of the diplomatic community and international organizations was held on 22 April.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM also briefed a delegation of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe.
The English version of this report is the only official document.
An unofficial translation is available in Macedonian and Albanian languages.
NGO Coalition “All for Fair  Trials” – Skopje
OSCE Mission to Skopje
Natali Petrovska, Attorney at law
Assistant Professor, Boban Misoski, Faculty of Law “Justinianus Primus”, Skopje
ANALYSIS OF DATA COLLECTED FROMTRIAL MONITORING IN 2016
Natali Petrovska, Attorney at law
Assistant Professor, Boban Misoski, Faculty of Law “Justinianus Primus”, Skopje
The content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the views or positions of the OSCE Mission to Skopje.
The Mission adheres to the Decision PC.DEC/81 of the OSCE Permanent Council.
INTRODUCTION
The Coalition “All for Fair Trials” is a network of 14 civic organisations in which members are local citizen associations for the purpose of monitoring trials before competent courts, in order to: a) ensure the guaranteed rights to fair trial as envisaged in the Constitution, laws and  ratified international agreements; b) increase the public awareness and underline the required reforms and the respective implementation concerning trials; c) enhance the practical knowledge of students of law; and d) strengthen the role and capacity of non-governmental organisations.
Given the current increasing necessity for trial monitoring, in particular concerning the field of criminal law, i.e. criminal procedure, in the course of 2016, the  Coalition, financially supported by the OSCE Mission to Skopje, implemented the project «Enhancing the independence, transparency and efficiency of the judiciary through trial monitoring”, as continuation of trial monitoring activities from the previous year.
It focused on the application of the new Law on Criminal Procedure in all four appellate regions in the country, specifically, in the basic courts, for the purpose of drafting a situational analysis along with recommendations for future activities and reforms, aimed at enhancing the capacities of the judicial system in the country.
METHODOLOGY
Monitors
15 monitors, with several-years long experience in trial monitoring throughout the country, were recruited for the needs of the project and for the preparation of the analysis, resulting from the available data from trial monitoring.
The monitors were required to have a university degree – a degree in law and thorough knowledge of criminal matters in order to be able to identify the most prevalent challenges encountered by the courts and all participants in criminal proceedings, as well as to detect the inadequate, i.e. incomplete implementation of the Law on Criminal Procedure.
Questionnaire
In the process of collecting data from trial monitoring, the monitors were provided with a tool, i.e. a questionnaire, which guided them within the system for processing the initial information and observations that were noted during their presence in the courtrooms.
Specifically, after having initially obtained the overall information from a particular hearing, based on 72 systematically arranged questions in the questionnaire, the monitors entered the collected data to an extent and in a manner that served the needs of the analysis.
The questionnaire itself was designed according to the sequence and manner of conducting criminal proceedings before a competent court, with particular focus on some of the new provisions, that is, introduced novelties in the Law on Criminal Procedure, along with provided tailored space where the personal cognitive perception of the monitors is entered.
GENERAL DATA
The monitoring system in the framework of this project covered the whole territory of the country, that is, the four appellate regions, with special focus on the courts in Skopje (Basic Court Skopje 1), Veles, Bitola, Shtip, Tetovo, Kumanovo and Kochani and targeted 450 court hearings or 372 criminal cases.
The total number of monitored trials included monitoring of 198 hearings or 152 cases in the Basic Court Skopje 1; 33 hearings and equivalent number of cases in the Basic Court Veles, 14 hearings concerning 12 cases in the Basic Court Kumanovo, and 71 hearings resulting from 57 cases in the Basic Court Tetovo, in the Basic Court Bitola, the number of monitored hearings was almost similar to the total number of monitored cases; 29 hearings were monitored concerning 23 cases in the Basic Court Shtip; and finally, the number of monitored hearings in the Basic Court Kochani largely overlapped with the number of cases, i.e. 16 hearings in 15 cases.
The respective statistics is presented in the Table below
Statistics on the number of monitored hearings against the number of cases.
Given the fact that the initial phase of this project overlapped with the beginning of the judicial administration (court clerks) strike, that lasted over half of the period envisaged for trial monitoring, the very dynamics of the monitoring activity was volatile, i.e. varied and reached its highest peaks once the strike ended.
Namely, as shown in the Table, one can note that the last 3 months of the monitoring process entail the largest number of hearings, i.e. September- 85, October- 91 and November- 161 hearings.
However, one can especially note the trend of hearings being held at the Basic Court Skopje 1 during the court administration strike.
Even though the court operation was at stand throughout the country and no hearings were held in most of the courts, i.e. the work was completely blocked; yet, that was not the case at the Basic Court Skopje 1.
In this court, some judges proceeded with work and held the scheduled hearings, and only small part of them demonstrated solidarity with the administration and discontinued the work; however, one should note that this refers to an insignificant number of judges.
Hearings per month
The data collected from the total number of hearings that were subject of monitoring throughout the country show that ⅓ of the hearings or 153 were postponed, 119 were completed in verdict, the indictment was withdrawn in 9 cases, the criminal proceedings were stayed in one hearing, whereas 168 hearings proceeded with procedural acts, as shown on the Chart below.
In realistic terms, this is a striking figure, especially given the fact that the number of postponed hearings in the two biggest appellate regions is clearly higher compared to the other regions.
Statistics on proceedings taken by courts
Based on the data, the postponement of hearings relies on several circumstances which are stipulated both in the Law on Criminal Procedure and beyond the law.
Namely, problems such as improper service of process, and failure of the parties and the witnesses and expert witnesses to appear in court hearings are singled out as topics that require further elaboration in order to advance and improve the system of securing the presence of the participants in the proceedings.
The statistics deriving from analysed data show that the postponement of hearings largely results from the absence of the defendant in the court proceedings – in 97 cases i.e. hearings, or due to the absence of the public prosecutor – 32 cases; absence of the defence attorney - 26 cases and incomplete panel of judges appointed on a specific case - 4 cases, however, one should not overlook the total number of 53 hearings when the postponement relied on “other grounds”.
One of the stated reasons for non-appearance of the defendants during the trial is the failure to bring them from the penitentiary facilities before the court.
In some cases, it results from lack of coordination with the registration system for transfer of detainees, while in other cases it results from technical difficulties (which is necessarily related to finances) for the detainee to be brought before court when the trial is held in cities outside the regions where the penitentiary institutions are located, while in some cases it results from overlapping with certain high profile court cases that practically leads to total blockage and dysfunction of the overall  system in a given court region (in this particular case, the Basic Court Skopje 1).
The legal provisions concerning the failure of the public prosecutor, i.e. private plaintiff to appear before the court clearly stipulate the essential role they have in the proceedings, despite this fact, public prosecutors failed to appear before the court in 32 cases or 32 hearings, which is a high percentage and accounts for 20% of the total number of postponed hearings.
This figure is further augmented by the number of 26 hearings where the defence attorney failed to appear.
This fact relies on the most prevalent reasons that defendants replace their defence attorneys and the concurrent obligations of defence attorneys in other cases, as well as the time required for the defence attorneys to study the facts and evidence of the respective case.
And finally, one reason for postponements under the category “other” refers to the failure of witnesses or expert witnesses to appear in court proceedings, as well as the need to present certain evidence, which is not yet provided or an expert report which is still not drafted.
In the instant case, total of 53 hearings were postponed under the category of reasons «other».
The Table below provides an overview of postponed court hearings by cities and the most frequent reasons thereof.
In view of the foregoing, this is one of the most striking problems that has been persistent in the past years in the judiciary.
The presented overview leads to the conclusion that the number of postponements is proportional to the size of the cities where the monitoring was conducted; hence, all the listed options for postponements in the questionnaire were exhausted in Skopje and Bitola, unlike smaller cities such as Veles and Kochani.
One thing that stands out, as shown in the Table below, is the defendant’s absence as reason for postponement in Skopje and Bitola, along with the absence of the public prosecutor (higher % in Skopje).
Reasons for postponement per city
In view of the monitoring data from the previous year, the data for this year do now indicate an upward trend, but quite the opposite, the statistics for both the previous and this year, shows 86 that  ⅓ of monitored hearings were postponed, which means that it poses a problem that may not be overlooked, but would require the adoption of legal solutions along with preventive mechanisms in order to improve the court proceedings.
Whether that would entail improved cooperation among the judicial authorities and those in charge of bringing detainees before courts, as quite often the absence of the defendant is not a fault on the part of the court, or whether that would mean more consistent application of the legal provisions pertaining to sanctioning the parties that fail to appear in court, such as the public prosecution office in the present case, the necessity for improved solutions has become increasingly obvious.
Based on the data from the conducted monitoring, the crimes committed in 450 hearings out of the total number of monitored hearings, mainly refer to the following chapters: «Crimes against property», «Crimes against life and body» as well as «Crimes against public transport safety».
Most common crimes were “Grand theft” and “Theft” in 60 and 38 of the monitored hearings, respectively, then “Bodily injury” in 40 hearings, “Endangered safety” in 20 hearings as well as “Endangered traffic safety” in 23 and «Severe crimes against the security of people and property in traffic» in 22 of the monitored hearings.
Number of criminal acts
From the total of 450 monitored hearings throughout the year, the monitors registered a number of 815 defendants that appeared in before the court for cases involving only one defendant or several defendants, reaching up to number of 37 defendants in one single case.
Number of hearings
Article 71 and Article 74 of the Law on Criminal Procedure stipulate the right to defence attorney.
According to the law, any individual who is suspected of or charged with a crime shall have the right to a defence attorney throughout the whole criminal procedure taken against him/her.
Prior to the first examination or any other proceedings specified in the  LCP are taken, the defendant shall be advised of his/her right to a defence attorney of his/her choice who can be consulted as well as that the defence attorney can be present during the examination.
However, in cases when the defendant is mute, deaf, or lacks the capacity to successfully defend him/herself or criminal proceeding are undertaken against the defendant for a crime which is punishable with a life sentence according to law, a defence attorney must be present at the very first examination.
According to the law, a defence attorney is necessary when detention is foreseen or imposed, that is, throughout the whole detention period.
In a situation when defence is mandatory and the accused fails to provide his/her defence attorney, the president of the court shall appoint an ex officio defence attorney for the further course of the proceedings, until the verdict becomes effective.
The following statistics derives from the data collected throughout the monitoring process:  276 accused individuals hired their own defence attorneys, 38 accused individuals were appointed an ex officio defence attorney and 108 accused individuals had no defence attorney.
Number of hearings in which the defendant had a defence attorney
Number of hearings in which the defendant had a defence attorney appointed ex-officio
Number of hearings in which the defendant didnot have a defence attorney
The Law on Criminal Procedure prescribes 4 types of summary proceedings:  1) summary proceedings for cases where a fine or imprisonment sentence up to 5 years is imposed, 2) proceedings in which a verdict is reached based on a plea agreement between the public prosecutor and the defendant, including the bargaining on the imposed sanction, 3) mediation proceedings where a specialized third party takes part - mediator, and 4) proceedings for issuing a penal notice proposing and prescribing a certain sanction when sufficient evidence of committed crimes exist, which is under the competence of a trial judge.
Having in mind that the monitors from the Coalition “All For Fair Trials” are allowed to access and attend only proceedings held in the court, i.e. public hearings, in addition to the regular proceedings, there was an opportunity to attend only one of the summary proceedings.
Accordingly, the collected data include 129 held regular proceedings or this accounts for 30% of all monitored hearings and 305 summary proceedings, which accounts for 70% of the hearings held.
Type of proceeding
MAIN TRIAL
Pursuant to the Law on Criminal Procedure, when the judge or the panel ascertains that all individuals required to attend the main trial are present, i.e. whether the trial can be held in the absence of some of the summoned persons, the court instructs the parties at the main trial to make the opening statements.
The process is conducted in successive order, i.e. the plaintiff- public prosecutor is given the opportunity to make the opening statement, followed by the defence attorney, i.e. defendant.
In view of this part of the procedure, once this legal instrument started to apply, the parties are given the opportunity to disclose decisive facts that they intend to prove, to list the evidence that they will present in a later phase and to determine the questions that will be discussed.
However, LCP distinguishes between the acts undertaken by the court and the application of this legal instrument both in regular and summary proceedings.
Namely, in regular proceedings, the above mentioned principle of making an opening statement is a rule, according to which the defence is always entitled not to make an opening statement, in summary proceeding, which cover over 80 % of the court cases, and entail crimes which are punishable with imprisonment sentence of up to 5 years, the opening statements of the public prosecutors transform into presentation of the indictment’s content, whereas the law does not foresee the contribution of the defence in respect of putting forward decisive facts in favour of the defence.
Even though the opening statements are not legally binding in summary proceedings, they are often utilized also by the defence attorneys.
Based on the processed data resulting from this monitoring exercise, there were a total number of 122 opening statements made by the public prosecutor, 59 by the defence attorney and 37 by the defendant.
The Table below shows the application of this legal instrument both in regular and summary proceedings.
One specific aspect that stands out is that in regular proceedings, on several occasions, the defence attorneys exercised their right not to make an opening statement, or specifically in 7 of the monitored cases.
Even though it is not specified for the summary proceedings, in almost 30% of cases, defence attorneys made opening statements, as shown in the graph below.
Opening statements
As part of the questionnaire, the monitors were tasked to assess, based on their individual perception, whether the opening statements disclose the decisive facts that will be further discussed and proved in the proceedings by the respective party making the opening statement.
Accordingly, the following data were obtained: -the public prosecutor’s opening statements were clear in 49% of the hearings, unclear in  23% of the proceedings and in 28% of the hearings the opening statements only partially revealed what was presented and will be proved by the public prosecutor;-the opening statements made by the defence attorney were clear in 77% of the hearings, unclear in 8% of the hearings, whereas 15% of the opening statements only partially revealed the facts that the defence i.e. defence attorney will further prove;-the opening statement made by the defendant was clear in 35% of the hearings, unclear in 6% of the hearings, and 59% of the opening statements only partially revealed the facts given by the defendant.
As a result, the data which were in this way obtained concerning the opening statements, undoubtedly show that defence attorneys make more clear and precise opening statements compared to the public prosecutors, furthermore, the high percentage of partially clear facts and evidence referred to by the defendants are indicative of the need for hiring a professional, that is, a defence attorney, that would represent the defendant’s interests and from the very beginning of the proceedings would portray a clear picture to the court about the intentions to propose evidence and about the case theory that will be elaborated.
Yet, one has to note that some of the opening statements made by the defendants, according to the monitors’ questionnaires, were made in the presence of their defence attorneys.
Furthermore, one must underline the detected inconsistency in the work of public prosecutors from the aspect of reducing the opening statement to a “plain” reading of the indictment, without presenting the theory of the case or the thesis that will be represented, and the way of distinguishing the legal elements that will be discussed in order to prove the grounds of the indictment.
Based on the processed data, the statistics shows that in over 70% of cases where the opening statements were made by the public prosecutor, it was reduced to plain reading of the indictment, rather than a more detailed explanation of what may be derived thereof.
Having made such opening statements, neither the court is clear what will the public prosecutor aim to prove, nor the defence is clear about the prosecutor’s thesis on the substantiation of the indictment or the plan to prove it.
GUILTY PLEA
The monitors attended 95 hearings in which the defendant pleaded guilty.
On this occasion, an analysis is conducted on the data obtained from the monitors regarding the legality of the guilty plea, the role of the court and the parties during the guilty plea process, as well as certain circumstances of guilty plea that concern some specific instruments in the criminal procedure and have immediate impact on the justification and legality of guilty plea.
Therefore, analysis is conducted on the data which refer to imposed detention at hearings when the defendant pleaded guilty, as well as the quantity of presented evidence by the court in determining the type and extent of criminal sanction under conditions of guilty plea during the first hearing of the main trial.
The Table below shows the trend of submission of guilty pleas, that is, out of the total number of 450 monitored hearings and 153 postponed, the monitors attended 95 hearings in which the defendant pleaded guilty.
Compared to the total number of hearings held (168), one can draw the conclusion that data concerning the guilty pleas made by defendants are considered as especially relevant data for drawing conclusions.
Moreover, out of the total number of analysed verdicts – 119, almost 95 verdicts were reached by guilty plea.
Guilty plea and type of criminal proceedings
Based on the obtained data, one can draw the conclusion that the instrument of guilty plea is put in place and has begun to take root in the national system of criminal justice.
Moreover, this instrument is also recognised by the parties in the criminal proceedings as an efficient tool for rapid, efficient and effective completion of criminal proceedings.
An additional argument for the increased application of this instrument may be the data from monitored trials in the previous year when guilty plea was made in 70 cases out of 550 hearings monitored in total, compared to this year, there is an increase of over one third, that is, defendants pleaded guilty at the main trial in 95 cases out of 450 hearings monitored, in total.
However, from the analysis of the basic courts’ annual reports1, the application of guilty plea is not made in the same extent as in the monitored cases, even though one can conclude that this instrument is applied with increased frequency.
Pleading guilty in summary proceedings
In view of the applicability, an additional argument is the fact that based on the analysed data, obtained by the monitors, this instrument is largely applied in summary proceedings, which accounts for around 85% of the cases, or for crimes which are punishable with up to 5 years of imprisonment.
These data support the thesis that courts feel safer to apply this instrument for minor crimes, while considered in correlation with the data obtained from the annual court reports, as well as the data obtained by the trial monitors, one can draw the conclusion that this instrument is not frequently applied for more serious crimes.
The data only confirm that it concerns a new instrument and the courts, understandably, have certain reservation to apply it in relation to more serious crimes.
Concerning the geographical distribution of the guilty plea in relation to the total number of monitored hearings, one can note that guilty plea was registered, in general, in almost one fifth of the monitored hearings, which accounts for 20% of monitored hearings.
Basic Court Skopje 1 and Basic Court Tetovo deviate from this trend.
Thus, one can notice the lowest number of monitored hearings in the Basic Court Skopje in which the defendant pleaded guilty, which accounts for 16% of the total number of monitored hearings, whereas guilty plea  was more frequent at the Basic Court Tetovo, that is,  in one third of monitored cases, which accounts for 38% of all monitored hearings.
Admission of guilt per criminal act
As to the type of crimes to which the defendants were willing to plead guilty, in general, it concerns a wide range of crimes.
If compared to the statistical yearbooks on crime movement, one can draw the conclusion that the defendants were generally willing to plead guilty to all crimes; or in other words, the trend of pleading guilty corresponds to the trend of crimes which are processed before the basic courts.
The majority of guilty pleas refer to crimes against the life and body, prop-erty and public traffic safety.
This is followed by crimes against the official position, sexual morality and sexual freedom.
Based on the data, one can discern the fact that pleading guilty during the main trial does not depend on the type of crime.
Generally, this is a positive conclusion as one cannot detect any selection in the guilty plea in relation to the type of crime.
In this context, an additional conclusion derives from the thesis that the willingness of the defendants to plead guilty depends on the extent to which the case and the criminal incident were investigated by the law enforcement agencies, i.e. the extent to which the indictment was substantiated.
The graphs below concern the analysis of the procedural rules on admissibility and legality of guilty plea.
Pursuant to the obligation deriving from Article 74 of the LCP that a defence attorney must attend when the defendant pleads guilty, the data, obtained from the monitors and further analysed, show that defence attorneys were present in all of the cases.
Were questions posed to check the admission of guilt made by the defendant
Concerning the data related to verification of all elements of a particular crime, one can conclude that when judges reviewed the guilty plea statement, the defendant was largely advised about the charges and what s/he had pleaded guilty for.
Nevertheless, there is a still persistent practice, despite the minimal improvements compared to the previous year (87% against 82%), that judges only read the indictment to the defendant, or provide explanation about the process of determining the type  and extent of criminal sanction, according to the provisions of the Law on Determining the Type and Extent of Criminal Sanction.
Therefore, one can draw the conclusion that the judges should dedicate more attention to the defendant as well as his/her defence attorney, with regard to the request for providing adequate legal aid to their clients; in the explanation about the legal elements of the crime; the prosecutorial evidence to corroborate the legal elements of the crime; and the manner of commission of the respective crime.
The court should be entirely convinced that the defendant had committed the respective crime as provided in the indictment; that is, the specific crime to which the defendant pleaded guilty in the course of the main trial.
It is therefore considered inadmissible that the court has adopted a practice to read the indictment or as entered in one of the monitors’ questionnaires - the defendant pleaded guilty, but the respective crime had not been committed as presented in the indictment.
Any such opposing by the defendant or correction made by the defendant concerning the indictment during the pleading of guilt should not have been accepted by the court as a voluntary admission of guilt for a given crime, as stated in the indictment and the court should have dismissed it and proceeded with the main trial as if no guilty plea had been made, pursuant to the provisions in Articles 381 and 334 of the LCP.
Were questions posed to check whether the defendant madethe admission of guilt of his/her own free will?
An interesting fact is that in 13% of the monitored hearings, where the defendant pleaded guilty, the monitors could note some inconsistency as regards the free will to plead guilty.
That is, in 11 cases, the defendant did not plead guilty of own free will or he/she had certain reservations; however, the court failed to take those reservations into account and accepted such flawed guilty plea.
Needless to say that such practice adopted by the court should be eradicated, especially in respect of the court›s role in the plea hearing or plea bargaining proceedings, as it assumes the role of guarantor and protector of the defendant’s rights.
Such practice stimulates the wrongful application of the guilty plea, and shows tolerance for the tactics of the authorised plaintiff to find a scapegoat with the aim to complete the processing of the cases through the court labyrinths, but failing to take account of either the real perpetrator of the crime, or the safeguards of justice.
Were questions posed to check the defendant’s awarenessof the consequences from the admission of guilt?
The same is the percentage of cases where the monitors took note of the lack of awareness on the part of the defendant regarding the admission of guilt.
The monitors detected cases where the court failed to pay any attention to the opposing on the part of the defendant during the guilty plea, which can lead to the conclusion that such admission of guilt was extorted.
The monitors provided interesting data that in one particular case, the court directly advised the defendant to plead guilty so that the public prosecution avoids to file an indictment against an older close relative, on whose behalf the electricity meter was recorded, concerning a case in which the defendant was charged with the crime – theft of electricity, pursuant to Article 235-a of the Criminal Code.
In these cases, instead of acting in the interest of justice and showing impartiality, the judges had predetermined position in relation to the defendant›s guilt, irrespective of his defence and failed to take into account the presumption of innocence of the defendant.
Despite the slight improvements compared to the previous year, it is of major concern that there are persistent cases in which the court, instead of being a passive arbitrator in assessing the defendant’s free will and awareness about the admission of guilt, the court still actively represents the interests of one of the parties, which is also contrary to the interests of the justice.
In this context, one can arrive at the conclusion about the need to provide additional training for judges, concerning the proactive protection of justice under conditions of admission of guilt during the main trial that is, increasing their active role in the process of assessing the admission of guilt.
This role brings it closer to the role of the court within the mixed criminal proceedings.
In other words, in order to determine whether the defendant made a guilty plea of one’s own will and with full awareness about any consequences thereof, the court can and should be active, as well as inquisitive in assessing the admission of guilt, in such a manner as requesting additional evidence or statements from the defendant in order to ensure complete disclosure and clarification of the criminal event and be fully convinced that the defendant committed the admitted crime.
Was there any evidence presented after the admission of guilt?
Finally, apart from examining the awareness and free will under which the admission of guilt is made, the court is to assess whether the guilty plea is corroborated by evidence.
Accordingly, Article 381, paragraph 3 of the LCP stipulates the court’s obligation to verify whether the admission of guilt is supported by evidence, i.e. during the main trial, the court shall only present evidence that leads to determining the type and extent of criminal sanction.
Based on the data obtained by the monitors, one may conclude that the specific part of the proceedings aimed to assess the defendant’s admission of guilt is most “vulnerable” in view of prevention of any false testimonies.
Based on the data, it is obvious that the court presents insufficient corroborating evidence for the admission of guilt, and the verdict is largely based on the statement, i.e. the admission of guilt by the defendant.
The monitors noted that only in nine hearings there was corroborating evidence presented concerning the determination of the type and extent of criminal sanction.
Moreover, an additional problem lies in the fact that in one half of these hearings, i.e. five of them, the only evidence presented by the court was the defendant’s prior conviction.
Therefore, it is needless to elaborate how questionable is the prior conviction as prima facie evidence.
This is for the simple reason that recidivism, i.e. prior conviction, itself cannot suffice as ground to determine the criminal life style of an individual.
Any prior conviction should be analysed from the aspect of the type of crime and the respective conviction, the time elapsed from the prior conviction until the admission of guilt, and the respective life style of the defendant.
It is considered impossible to determine a more severe penalty by applying a simple mathematical operation and calculate the prior convic-tion as nine points5.
Having regard to the presented data, one can arrive at the conclusion about the necessity of having the court to undertake an active role during the evidentiary hearing; that is, to be authorised to request the parties to provide evidence of appropriate quantity and quality, in order to accept the admission of guilt as righteous and fair, and determine the adequate sanction accordingly.
The reasons why evidence is presented in this manner cannot be identified only with the role of the court, but also with some inconsistencies in the LCP.
According to the LCP, evidence is proposed by the parties, and following the defendant’s guilty plea, the court has insight only in the list of evidence that will be presented during the evidentiary hearing in support of the indictment (Article 321, paragraph 2 of the Law on Criminal Procedure - LCP).
The court, therefore, has no knowledge in advance whether any of the listed evidence may be in favour of the guilty plea and to which extent the respective evidence can contribute to the determination of the type and extent of sanction.
Moreover, there is a prevailing dilemma, whether any of the parties would be interested in complete disclosure of the evidence through the extensive methods of direct and cross examination of witnesses under conditions when the defendant pleaded guilty.
Accordingly, the LCP would require certain reforms, in the context of modification of the previsions that regulate the main hearing, in such a manner that would accept the “originary” solution from the American criminal justice system that is, holding a separate sentencing hearing.
Such a hearing would eliminate the dilemmas which the local courts are confronted with, due to the existing provisions of the LCP which fail to provide efficient means for presenting evidence in support of the guilty plea and determining the most appropriate sanction, therefore, the court relies only on very simple evidence, that is, prior conviction records, and also relies on the already questionable6 provisions of the Law on Determining the Type and Extent of Criminal Sanction.
In respect of the question “Did the defence attorney have enough time to advise the defendant?”, the monitors had the possibility to make an assessment only in one third of monitored hearings in which the defendant pleaded guilty.
Based on the data from 31 answers, the monitors noted that in 94% of the cases that the defendant had enough time to consult  his/her defence attorney, whereas in 6% it was noted that the defendant did not consult his/her defence attorney or he had no sufficient time to consult his/her defence attorney.
Nevertheless, one cannot consider these data as problematic for a simple reason - if the defendant already had a defence attorney during the previous phases of the criminal proceedings, one can expect that the guilty plea had been already agreed upon and elaborated with his/her defence attorney.
This practice would become problematic in cases in which the defendant had no defence attorney, then decided to plead guilty, and only then hired an attorney or was appointed an ex officio attorney by the court.
In such cases, it is considered necessary that the court provides sufficient time to the defendant and the defence attorney, in order to enable the defence attorney to explain any consequences of the guilty plea to his/her client.
Moreover, if such remarks relate to this risky group in 6% of the hearings, any such practice of the court needs to be eradicated and should not be tolerated by any of the parties, irrespective of the fact that the acceptance of the defendant’s guilty plea by the court is in favour both of the defendant and his/her defence attorney, as well as the public prosecutor.
Such a practice is unlawful and contrary to the interests of justice.
DETENTION AND MEASURES FOR SECURING ATTENDANCE
Article 144 of the Law on Criminal Procedure provides the following measures for securing attendance: summons, precautionary measures, bail, arrest, deprivation of liberty, retention, short detention, home detention and detention.
In respect of the range of these measures, the monitors attended only 34 hearings in which the defendants were in detention (see table below), while milder measures for securing the attendance of defendants were applied in only 14 cases.
Based on the obtained data, there is a noticeable tendency for non-excessive use of detention by the court in the analysed and recorded cases by the monitors, or the measure of detention was applied in about 8% of the monitored cases.
However, having in mind the type of crimes for which the hearings were subject to monitoring, one can conclude that detention is not imposed only in small and insignificant percentage, compared to the other hearings.
There is a concern, as noted by the monitors, about the persistent practice of the courts not to provide appropriate explanation on the reasons to impose the measure of detention, or to provide realistic assessment of the underlying factors and register them in writing in the decision to continue the detention7.
In addition to imposing the detention measure, the monitors noted that milder measures for securing the attendance of defendants were applied by the court in only 26 cases (see the table below).
The monitors noted that these measures were imposed on the defendants in 14 cases; in two cases the measures were imposed on the other participants in the criminal proceedings, that is, the damaged party and the witness were forcibly brought on one occasion, whereas the milder measure - summons - was applied in the remaining 10 cases.
According to these data, it is inevitable to conclude that the court fails to take into account the alternatives to the most severe measure – detention - as the efficiency of such measures is already recognised in other more developed criminal justice systems.
In this context, the milder measures remain to be only a matter of normative style in our LCP, which are applied very rarely or not applied at all.
Regretfully, the same is true about the following measures: bail, home detention and most of the precautionary measures.
Accordingly, one needs to note the arguments for overlooking these measures, namely, there is lack of adequate mechanism for their application and control; the court does not dispose of appropriate tools that would provide convincing data that if applied, there will be sufficient guarantee that the defendant’s presence will be secured during the main hearings and that their application would exclude or reduce the risks for which the measures were applied.
Therefore, it is recommended that mechanisms for institutional support of the court need to be developed in order to ensure the application of milder measures that secure the attendance of the defendant in the course of criminal proceedings.
In this respect, such mechanisms are primarily seen from the aspect of developing the capacities of the Probation Services, which are established in accordance with the Law on Probation; introduction of changes and amendments to the Law on Probation that would incorporate the respective measures as competence of the probation services; as well as application of the LCP by imposing an ex officio obligation to the probation services to deliver the respective data to the court and generate risk assessments concerning the defendant, that would serve as ground on which the court would decide about the application of the most appropriate measure for securing the attendance of the defendant.
Finally, having regard to these recommendations, the court would be enabled to provide true and based on fact rationale in the decision to apply the measures for securing attendance.
In respect of assessing the legality of the procedure to apply these measures, one can conclude that apart from one case, the requirements of the LCP referring to the presence of the defence attorney when the measure of detention is imposed, were properly applied in all other cases.
Detention-without a defence attorney
On the other hand, based on the monitors’ analysis, one can commend the practice of the court (see the graph below) for having entirely fulfilled the procedural provisions on the obligatory attendance of a defence attorney under conditions when the detained person admitted the guilt.
Admission of guilt made with a defence attorney-detention
The observed practice of the court to fail to act in line with Article 173 of LCP is problematic, that is, according to this Article, detention is to be discontinued following the admission of guilt,  in cases when it had been imposed under conditions of existent justified risk that the defendant will hide, falsify or destroy the traces of the crime; or if there are special circumstances indicating that the defendant will obstruct the criminal proceedings by tempering with witnesses, expert witnesses, accomplices or those covering up criminal acts.
Or, despite the insignificant number of observed violations when the court acted contrary to the LCP in two of four noted cases, or specifically, it failed to discontinue the measure of detention once the defendant admitted the guilt, yet, any such cases require to be further analysed.
This is for a simple reason that being driven by the iura novit curia  principle, one can draw the conclusion that most probably detention in such cases was imposed on several grounds, and there was rational expectation on the part of the court that the other grounds for continuation of the measure of detention would persist, even though the defendant pleaded guilty.
However, despite of having accepted this argument, and as noted in this report, the existing problem still persists in respect of the factually instituted decisions to impose detention, that is, the frequent, uncritical and unsubstantiated imposing of detention on several grounds from Article 165 of LCP, as well as the noted problem concerning the rationale in the decisions to impose detention based on (in)appropriate facts and evidence, which also implies their (in)appropriate registration in the respective decisions.
Was the detention discontinued after making admission of guilt
Any other explanation concerning the monitors’ allegations would lead to the conclusion that the foregoing Roman legal principle is denied, which would further result in wrongful application of the LCP provisions.
Moreover, had the court taken this position in such cases, defence attorneys as well as public prosecutors, who are the guardians of legality, should not have tolerated any such action, i.e. it should have been challenged in appeal proceedings for a simple reason that such cases endanger the fundamental human right – right to liberty.
EVIDENTIARY PROCEEDINGS
The evidentiary proceeding, as part of the main hearing, is stipulated within the scope of Articles 382 to 394 of the LCP, and as such it is given a consecutive order in the law, as well as in the systematically arranged questionnaire of the Coalition, that is, after the defendant is advised about his/her rights and the option to plead guilty during the hearing.
There is a clearly prescribed order of presenting the evidence in this part of the proceedings.
Specifically, the first to be presented are the evidence related to the indictment and any property claims, followed by the evidence of the defence and possible prosecutorial evidence that would challenge any of the evidence presented by the defence, in the form of evidence in rebuttal, as well as the evidence of the defence in response to the such challenging, in the form of evidence in reply.
The Law on Criminal Procedure specifies 3 ways of examination - direct examination, cross-examination and re-direct and re-cross examination.
Direct examination is undertaken by the party that proposed the witness, the expert witness or the technical advisor; cross-examination is undertaken by the opposing party, whereas any additional examination is repeated by the party who called the witness or the expert witness, so that any questions posed during this examination are limited to the questions posed during the examination of the opposing party.
After the parties complete their examination, the chair of the judicial panel (and its members) may ask questions.
During the evidentiary proceedings, the role of the court is to exercise control over the manner and order of examining witnesses and expert witnesses as well as the presenting of evidence, and accordingly takes into account the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of the proceedings and the determination of truth.
In this part of the proceedings,  the court also  decides about any objections raised by the parties, whereby it can ban a certain question or answer to a question which had already been posed or if that is considered inadmissible or irrelevant for the case, or the respective question entails both the question and the answer, indeed, cross-examination is considered as an exception.
The data collected by the monitors show that there is strict adherence to the legal provisions in this respect, and only minimal exception of 1% was registered; that is, the monitors registered inconsistences in the legally prescribed order of presenting evidence in only 2 cases, which was explained on the ground of ensuring the cost-effectiveness of the proceeding.
However, what is being perceived as cost-effectiveness on the part of the court (in the respective 2 cases), in fact, entails the violation of the defendant’s rights which are specified in the LCP.
Was the order of presenting evidence in accordancewith the legally prescribed order?
One novelty that was introduced in the LCP and is currently being applied, refers to the application of paragraph 2 of Article 386, according to which the witness should take an oath before giving a testimony.
One should underline the fact that even though taking an oath is prescribed by law, the court is obliged to warn the witness about his/her duty to inform the court on any matters related to the case to the best of his/her knowledge, and advise the witness that any false testimony is a considered a serious offence.
Based on the available data, the novelty in the law is applied to a satisfactory extent by the court - 69%, however, irrespective of whether an oath was taken or not, the person who testifies may be held criminally responsible for giving false statements in the capacity of a witness and this may be the reason why such obligation is seen as non-obligatory.
In view of the LCP application, and especially the application of the introduced novelties, during the period of vacatio legis as well as once the LCP started to apply, numerous training were organized by the OSCE Mission to Skopje, the American Bar Association in cooperation with the Academy for Judges and Public Prosecutors and the Bar Association, yet, one can note the need for additional professional development of all actors in the proceedings.
In particular, this refers to the application of the provisions related to direct examination, cross-examination and re-cross and re-direct examination of witnesses which is due to the fact that the actors in the proceedings have not yet mastered the techniques which are required to apply the respective legal provisions.
The foregoing conclusion derives from the data collected in respect of the examination of witnesses.
The questions that were designed and included in the questionnaire and were used by the  monitors as  tool for sharing the experiences and the findings obtained in the court, also included a set of questions that precisely refer to the manner and techniques for different types of examination.
The questions entail the aspects of clarity, lack of ambiguity, the extent to which the parties in the proceedings have studied and become familiar with the case, as well as the technical rules that the court and the parties are to respect during the proceedings.
In respect of the part “Were the questions clear and precise during the direct examination of the witness or expert witness?”, the following data were obtained from 126 hearings in which direct examination was applied:
In respect of the question whether the party, who called the witness, left an impression of knowing what he/she was asking and can properly handle the case, we found that irrespective of whether the public prosecutor or the defence called the witness, both parties made the impression that they knew what they were asking and that they handled the case well, which can be seen in the graphs below.
Direct examination undertaken by
As to the court›s activity in the process of presenting evidence, it is stipulated that the role of the court is to exercise control over the manner and order of examining the witnesses, expert witnesses and the presentation of evidence, and accordingly the court takes into account the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of the proceedings, and the determination of truth, when necessary, but also takes care about the dignity of the parties and witnesses in the proceedings.
During the proceedings, the court can ban a certain question or answer which had already been answered, or if the question is considered as inadmissible or irrelevant; the court may also reject that certain evidence is presented if considered as unnecessary and of no relevance for the case, however; under no circumstances after the cross-examination, the court may not prevent the opposing party to cross-examine the witness.
This type of violation was observed in only 2% of the processed data.
As regards the cross-examination, the data indicate the necessity for further improvements by all actors in the proceedings.
Cross-examination is stipulated to be limited and to entail only questions that were previously asked by the party that proposed the witness.
Deviation from 106 this rule, which is stipulated in the LCP, was noticed in 18% of the monitored cases.
Specifically, in 88 hearings involving cross-examination, in 72 of them, which accounts for 82%, the cross-examination was limited to questions from the direct examination; however, this was not true in the remaining 18%.
There were registered cases when the judge directly reacted to questions which deviate from the concept of cross-examination, even though it is still questionable whether the judge has the right to ban a particular question without properly raised objection by the party in the proceedings.
In other cases, the parties failed to raise objections on the questions, and therefore they were subject of further explanation and reply.
Based on the collected data, it is a striking fact that the mechanism of cross-examination is more utilized by the defence attorneys than the prosecutors.
As shown in the graphs below (the horizontal line on the bottom of the graph shows the number of defendants in the proceeding), total of 64 persons were cross-examined by the public prosecution, and 104 persons were cross-examined by the defence attorneys.
The data lead to the conclusion that defence attorneys show more determination to utilize the available resources in order to put forward their defence strategy and prove the theory of the case in the interest of the defendants.
Another indicator of the need for improved application of the mechanism- cross-examination by the parties, relies on the fact that no closed questions were used in 31% of cross-examinations.
Furthermore, some interruptions were registered during the cross-examination, that is, 31% of the examination was not performed in a smooth and uninterrupted manner.
On the other hand, according to the monitors’ perception, the cross-examination was successful in 80% of cases.
With regard to the use of objections as tactical mechanism to defend one’s own strategy in a particular case, one can conclude that practically there is equal utilization of this mechanism by both the prosecution office and the defence.
However, if compared to the statistics from the analysis for the previous year when the use of objections by the public prosecution accounted for 22% of the cases and 11% on the part of the defence, this year there is a slight downward trend concerning the public prosecution office and upward trend concerning the defence.
That is, the public prosecution office used objections in 20% of hearings, whereas the defence used objections in 15% of hearings, which, in fact, implies that the utilization of this mechanism is brought closer.
Use of objections in the course of the proceeding
As previously mentioned, the possibility for the court to ask questions in order to clarify certain facts and inconsistencies in the statements is not completely removed, but one has to bear in mind the old Law on Criminal Procedure where such possibility was an exclusive right of the court; that is, it was the court that asked questions, while the parties could pose questions once the examination was completed in order to establish some missing facts.
The court is now given the possibility to pose questions as soon as both parties in the proceeding have completed their examinations; however, such possibility should not be transformed into a separate examination.
The graph below enables us to analyse the possibility for the court to pose questions, which illustrates that the court has been largely utilizing the additional mechanism for posing questions, i.e. in 48 of the monitored proceedings, which accounts for 42% of all monitored proceedings.
Does the court exercise its right to pose questions to the witness/expert?
Some questionnaires include that judges have shifted this possibility into an entirely separate examination of witnesses/experts.
Obviously, the old habits which were deeply rooted in the previous system are being still applied, despite the diametrical changes of the overall system of court proceed-ings.
With respect to Article 388, paragraph 2 of LCP, i.e. exception to direct presentation of evidence, according to which the statements made by witnesses during the investigation  and the statements collected by action of the defence  during the investigation,  can be used in cross-examination or to challenge the presented findings or as evidence in rebuttal, for the purpose of evaluating the authen-ticity of the statements given during the main hearing,  the monitors found that this exception was not 108 largely  applied.
However, for certain percentage or  18% of cases where this exception was applied, this was undertaken due to inconsistent statements or due to reminding the witness about already giv-en statement in order to discredit the witness, that is, when the statement given in direct examination deviated from the previously given statement.
In addition, in lower percentage of the hearings, i.e. 8% of the monitored hearings, the public prosecutor gave a proposal for reading the statement that the witness or the defendant made in a preliminary procedure.
With regard to the examination of the defendant in the proceedings, one has to underline that in accordance with Article 391, paragraph 1 of the LCP, the defendant shall be examined on the proposal of the defence.
The introduction of this provision in the law means complete aban-doning of the principle for automatic examination of the defendant only based on the need of the prosecution office to prove the indictment.
Having abandoned this system of  examination, now the defendant is enabled not to be examined in the proceedings, but rather it  relies on the disposition of the defence, which is contrary to the previous provisions according to which the defendant should have used the right to remain silent in a situation when s/he considers that no statement should be made, which in return creates a different image of the defendant, most often that s/he is guilty and early conclusions are reached by the court both for the defendant and his/her actions.
When the defence makes a proposal that the defendant should be examined, the exam-ination during the hearing is carried out according to the applicable rules which are valid for examination of witnesses, i.e. expert witnesses with respect to particular types of examinations, whereby the defendant may not refuse to answer any questions that are posed according to the concept for cross-examination.
The statistics obtained from the data collected this year, shows that in 65% of the monitored hearings the defendant was examined, which is an upward trend compared to the data from pre-vious years, that is, 53% in 2015 and 50% in 2014, respectively.
FAIR TRIAL – equality of arms
With respect to the evaluation of the equality of arms between the parties, one can conclude that the monitors preserved the same position as in the previous years.
On the question “Were the parties equally treated by the court and whether the defence was given the same opportunities as the public prosecution office in the process of proposing evidence?” the monitors provided high percentage of affirmative answers - 99%.
According to the answers, the monitors provided negative answers in only three, i.e. two cases, as illustrated on the graph below.
Were the defence and the public prosecutor equally treated by the court?
In this context, one can conclude that during the main hearing, when the parties are afforded the possibility to oppose before the court, the court largely equally treats the parties, that is, gives them equal opportunity to propose evidence.
In addition, the identified remarks in the sense of restricting the right to equality of arms, most probably derive from the unequal opportunities given to the parties, primarily in the course of the preliminary proceedings, that is, when evidence is collected, so by analogy, if the parties are not able to collect certain evidence during the investigation, there is no possibility to propose that such evidence is presented during the main hearing.
In fact, in this way, the problems related to the equality of arms between the parties, which is part of the fair trial principle, can be possibly disguised if the analysis is made only from the aspect of the role of the court in the course of the main hearing.
Was the defence given the same opportunities as the publicprosecution office in respect of proposing evidence?
Public trial right/principle
With regard to the publicity, as one of the fundamental principles of court proceedings, one can conclude that any significant inconsistencies in the application of provisions of the LCP were not noticed by the monitors.
Also, the monitors concluded that in cases where the public was excluded, that was undertaken in compliance with the provisions of the LCP.
One interesting fact in terms of protecting the right to public trials is the obvious inactivity when it comes to having publicly announced the time and cases brought before the courts.
As this matter is concerned, one can notice a constant downturn, compared to the previous year, when the time and the place of the trials were not announced before the courtroom in only 12% of the monitored cases, this year, the trend is further enhanced and accounts for almost 20% of the analysed cases.
The reasons for such weakening of the right of the public to be informed about the place and time of court proceedings in the court buildings can be identified with the poor maintenance of the notice boards in the courts; there is poor planning about the regular maintenance of the notification systems in the Judicial budget or the court administration units lack adequate understanding of the relevance of timely notification about action taken before the court, so that they overlook the obligation during the ongoing exercising of the judicial competencies.
Were the place and time of the trial publically announcedon the notice board outside the courtroom?
Impartiality right/principle
The principle of court’s impartiality is one of the essential principles as part of the right to fair trial and fair proceedings.
The analysis whether this principle is protected in the court proceedings was based on a set of questions concerning the judicial disqualification, which is, in fact, one mechanisms under conditions when the partiality of the court towards some of the parties is recognized.
Throughout the monitoring, the monitors did not witness any cases when the parties requested the judge to be disqualified.
The data lead to the conclusion that the court adequately applied and gave due attention to the provisions of the LCP, which stipulate when a judge must be disqualified, as well as that the court appropriately conducted the proceedings without any grounds for suspicion of its partiality, which can be a ground for optional disqualification of judges (recusal).
Interestingly enough, in seven proceedings the monitors noted that the judges had already formed opinion with regard to the case.
In particular, the data show that these figures are continuously on the increase in the last three years, that is, from only two registered cases two years ago, it increased to five cases last year and finally, seven registered cases in this year.
Furthermore, it is worth noting that this is usually the case when the defendant had already pleaded guilty.
Despite the insignificant number of such registered case, i.e. seven hearings out of total of 450 monitored hearings, yet, such practice poses a certain concern because instead of having the court actively assess the guilty plea, there is a situation where the court hardly waits for the admission in order to have its position towards the defendant verified.
Moreover, such cases would also require that the role of the defence attorney is re-evaluated, i.e. whether and how was the client advised about the admission of guilt.
When the court has taken such a role, the overall guarantee and safeguard mechanisms of the courts’ image become highly questionable.
One possibility to abandon this situation is the prospective future reform of the LCP provisions by introduction of a special sentencing hearing, and in such case some additional evidence will have to be presented before the court that would confirm the guilt on the part of the defendant, which was previously discerned by the court through the defendant’s admission of guilt.
Based on the data, one can conclude that the court was biased in five cases, whereas the defendant was intimidated in two cases.
Such intimidation, as was additionally explained by the monitors, was detected through the way in which the court, while explaining the provisions of the Law on Determining the Type and Extent of Criminal Sanction, used wording that stimulated the defendant’s admission of guilt and put strong emphasis on the fact that admission of guilt implies a milder sanction as opposed to the having held the main hearing which would result in more severe sanction.
In such cases, one can consider it probable that the court delivered inappropriate wording for the purpose of somehow assisting the defendant, while giving explanation about the consequences from the admission of guilt.
Yet, such practice of the courts should be minimized and eliminated through appropriate training of judges.
In order to avoid the practice of the court to give indications about the consequences from the admission of guilt, which may be further interpreted both by the defendant or other actors in the proceedings that the court is in favour of the admission of guilt.
In this way, the admission of guilt would only result from the free will of the defendant and would be void of any burdens from initiatives or subtle pressures on the part of the court.
As far as the additional training for judges is concerned, a particular accent should be put on training the judges about the communication of the court with the clients, given the fact that improper ex-parte communication can largely create an impression about the (im)partiality of the court both for the defendant and the general public.
Such impression was created based on the 112 fact that the monitors registered this practice in 12 hearings, which implies a significant increase, compared to the previous year, when such communication was registered in only 5 cases.
Was there improper ex-parte communication?
The reasons for the necessity of additional trainings for judges rely on the fact that under conditions of improper ex-parte communication, the court runs the risk to be recognized as closer to some of the parties, whereby the general public no longer has impression that the court is impartial.
Also, sometimes defence attorneys make an attempt and/or abuse the improper communication with the court so as to present themselves before the clients as having close relations/contacts with the judges, and justify the promises that they  had made to the clients, even though not always realistic, regarding the outcome of the criminal proceedings.
Presumption of innocence
Presumption of innocence is closely related to matters of partiality and all other previously analysed aspects.
This year, unlike the previous year, the situation has deteriorated when viewed from the aspect of the data observed by the monitors.
The monitors registered that the defendant’s right to presumption of innocence was violated in eight cases, which accounts for 3%, and there is a triple increase compared to the previous year when it accounted for only 1% of the cases11.
Was there anything suggesting that the principle of presumptionof innocence was not respected?
This conclusion, viewed in relation to other data on the court’s impartiality, where the mon-itors found that the court was biased in seven cases, and the defendant’s right to presumption of innocence was violated in eight cases, can point to the conclusion that in all of the registered cases, the court was biased to the detriment of the defendant.
No comments are needed in terms of which would be the effects deriving from this conclusion.
Therefore, it is deemed necessary that additional training is delivered for the judges with respect to their role in assessing the defendant’s admission of guilt during the court proceedings.
However, a dose of optimism is instilled by the low number of registered cases, which is why one can conclude that this is not a widespread phenomenon among the judges and therefore, it can be easily thwarted and eliminated.
Right to defence
The right to defence was analysed in a set of questions, mainly in respect of advising the defendant about his/her rights, defence attorneys’ efficiency to realise the theory of the case during the main hearing, the access of the defence to the overall evidence, the appropriate time for preparation, and possible restrictions on this right or/and restrictions on the right of the defendants held in detention to communicate with their defence attorneys.
As to the efficiency of the right to defence, our monitors noted that in 19 cases, which accounts for 12% of the answers to the question, defence attorneys were not equal to the task in terms of ensuring efficient and professional defence to their clients.
In that context, even though it concerns a low percentage from the total number of monitored cases, it is deemed our duty to note that defence attorneys, and the Bar as a professional organisation, are obliged to ensure continuous education and development of the professional standards for the members.
Therefore, there will be a need to provide analysis on continuous basis concerning the efficiency and professionalism of the defence attorneys12 , in particular, under conditions when the adversarial system is put in place, and when their professionalism becomes especially apparent during the main hearing, while the outcome of the criminal proceedings largely depends on the defence.
This fact is supported by an additional argument, which poses a concern, that compared to the previous year there is an upward trend, that is from 6%13 to 12% in the analysed completed questionnaires.
Furthermore, our primary consideration refers to the appropriate formulation of the case theory of the defence, the proposing of appropriate evidence, and the active role of the defence to challenge the prosecutorial evidence by cross-examination and the practice of raising objections to the court so that prosecutor’s questions during the witness testimony are overruled by the court.
Regarding the efficiency of the defence, the defence attorneys, in a defensive manner, often put forward arguments based on the lack of sufficient time to prepare their own defence or that they were confronted with certain restrictions in the contact with their clients.
Such inconsistencies were registered in four cases.
With regard to the problems that defence attorneys face in the provision of effective and efficient defence to their clients, traditionally, they claim that they have restricted access to all the evidence available to the public prosecution office (in 6 cases); that the prosecution fails to deliver the evidence to the defence (in 3 cases); and in other 5 cases in which defence attorneys were denied this right.
One can notice that this year, there is drastic increase in the number of complaints from defence attorneys, that is, from two registered case in the previous year, up to fourteen registered cases this year, or a sevenfold increase.
Were there reactions on the part of the defence because
Accordingly, this can be understood that the desired objectives of the criminal procedure reform15  , put in place through the adoption of the LCP in 2013, have not appropriately echoed in practice; and by making an analogy, one should consider certain modifications of the LCP provisions that would incorporate the safeguard mechanisms for the defence attorneys, so that the obligation to allow the defence attorneys access to all prosecutorial evidence would be enhanced.
This can be made feasible through introduction of a ban to present evidence which was not delivered to the defence and is deemed detrimental to the defendant, or through introduction of an obligation to present evidence which is beneficial for the defence, but the defence claims that even though the public prosecution office is in possession of that evidence, yet it was not delivered to the defence.
Also, the practice of giving limited access of the defence to certain evidence should be prohibited, because no copying, recording or transcripts are allowed.
This refers to cases when the evidence is presented to the defence only in the premises of the public prosecution office, with no possibility for the defence attorney to copy or make transcripts of the evidence, or this activity is further burdened with inappropriately high costs for copying or electronic multiplication on another electronic device for data transfer.
Also, it is considered essential that deadlines, specified in the law, need to be changed and extended - according to which the defendant and defence attorney during the investigation have the right to submit certain documents, evidence or request the public prosecutor to undertake certain investigation and secure certain evidence, in respect of paragraph 4 of Article 302 of LCP, as well as that special deadline should be determined for the main hearing, meaning that the defendant and his/her defence attorney would have sufficient time to prepare the defence concerning the newly obtained evidence by the public prosecution office.
PRONOUNCING AND ANNOUNCING THE VERDIT
Once all the evidence is presented, namely, the evidentiary and main hearings are completed, according to the LCP, the provisions referring to the verdict are successively applied.
Three types of verdicts are stipulated in our Law on Criminal Procedure: rejecting – meaning that the indictment was rejected, not guilty – meaning that the defendant was acquitted, and guilty – meaning that the defendant was convicted/found guilty.
The trial monitors from the Coalition “All for Fair Trials” did not detect any rejecting and not-guilty verdicts; however, they came across situations when the indictment was withdrawn by the public prosecutor in the course of the proceeding.
The indictment was withdrawn in 9 of the monitored cases, that is, in 3 cases where the crime “Bodily Injury” was the ground for prosecu-tion, in 2 cases “Grand Theft” and the remaining for the following crimes “Coercion”, “Endangered Safety”, “Severe Crimes against the Safety of  People and Property in Traffic” and “Providing Public Transport Services without License”.
Indictments withdrawn based on the type of crime
According to the provisions of the LCP, once the verdict is pronounced, it must be immediately announced in public, when the court is not able to pronounce the verdict the same day after the completion of the main hearing, the announcement of the verdict may be delayed for a period not longer than 3 days.
It is stipulated that the court announces the verdict (chair of the judicial panel or sole judge) in the presence of the parties, their legal representatives, proxies, defence attorneys, by publically reading the enacting part of the verdict and stating the reasoning thereof.
In a brief explanation, the court makes reference to the criminal act the defendant «is charged with» and already convicted for (with the verdict), as well as to the evidence presented.
According to the processed monitoring data, it is shown that the verdict was publically an-nounced in 74% of cases, unlike in 26% of the cases when the verdict was not publically announced, also, the data show that when the verdict was pronounced at the hearing, in 41 cases or hearings the court made reference to the criminal act and the evidence, in 3 cases it made a partial reference, whereas in 9 hearings the court made no reference at all.
Compared to the statistics obtained for the needs of similar analysis in the previous year, one can note an upward trend in the percentage of verdicts that were not publically pronounced and announced.
Specifically, based on the data from the previous year, the court publically announced the verdict in 88% of cases and in 12% of cases the court failed to do so.
But, it I worth noting the fact that in accordance with Article 406 of the LCP, as soon as the verdict is announced, the chair of the judicial panel or the sole trial judge shall advice the parties on the right to appeal as well as the right to respond to the appeal.
When a suspended sentence is pronounced, the court has the obligation to warn about the meaning of the suspended sentence and the conditions that the defendant (now convicted) must fulfil.
Was the defendant provided explanation on the terms of appeal?
As shown in the graph above, in 24% of cases, which equals 15 monitored hearings, the court failed to provide explanation on the terms of the appeal even though the court is under such ob-ligation, irrespective of whether the defendant was present at the main hearing with or without a defence attorney.
In 76% of hearings, which equals 48 monitored hearings, the court acted in com-pliance with the law.
One has to underline that these data would not be considered as striking if there were available data that in most of the cases where the court failed to explain the terms of the appeal, the defendant’s attorney was present and could later provide professional advice to his/her client on the appeal procedure, however, no such data were at disposal, and no further comments can be made.
If one summarizes and compares the data on the number of verdicts (convictions) against the data on the number of verdicts based on admission of guilt, one can arrive at the following conclu-sion, as illustrated in the graph below:
The provision on guilty plea is notably applied in in the course of the proceedings in large number of cases.
The data show a high percentage of admission of guilt during the proceedings, i.e. it accounts for 64% of the total number of monitored cases, against 36% of regular (conviction) verdicts.
Generally, this results from the need and the commitment of the defence attorneys to milder sanctions, given that the admission of guilt implies certain percentage to reduce the sentence, and given the attitudes and perceptions that the courts had established for many years concerning the defendants and the unavoidable possible conviction, so that on this ground defendants are more or less convicted, but still convicted.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS:
Detected problems concerning the improper summoning are still persistent, which further results in failure of the parties, expert witnesses and witnesses to attend court hearings.
Recommendation: It would be necessary that the summoning system for witnesses is further elaborated and improved and an efficient system for electronic service to the parties and experts is introduced, as well as to ensure the active involvement of the Ministry of Interior in providing personal data.
The practice of failing to transfer defendants and detainees from penitentiary institutions poses a problem.
The reasons mainly result from: lack of coordination with the registration system for escorting the transfer of persons deprived of liberty, or lack of financial or transportation means to transfer those persons.
Recommendation: Improved coordination among the respective authorities and improvement of the AKMIS System in order to eliminate the detected problems.
The allocation of budget funds for proper functioning of the courts should be realistic.
In view of the opening statements, there is an established practice of inappropriate formulation and presentation of the respective content; whereby the opening statements are transformed into a plain reading of the indictment, presentation of evidence, putting emphasis on the previous convictions of the defendant, without presentation of the case theory or identification of the legal elements which are to be further debated.
Recommendation: Provision of additional trainings for all participants in the criminal proceed-ings about proper application of the provisions of the LCP that stipulate the opening statements.
The guilty plea as a new instrument is well represented in the national criminal justice system, whereby the application is not dependent on the type of the crime, despite that it is most frequently applied for smaller crimes.
The collected data lead to the conclusion that this instrument is recognised by the parties in the criminal proceedings as an efficient tool for rapid, efficient and effective completion of the criminal proceeding.
Concerning the assessment of the defendant’s guilty plea, it is noted that there is an improper practice by the courts to accept flawed admissions of guilt, that is, situations when the court failed to fully establish whether the defendant made the admission of guilt (guilty plea) knowingly and/or of his/her own will.
Recommendation: Additional training of judges would be necessary in order to ensure proactive protection of justice under conditions when the admission of guilt is made in the course of the main hearing that is, increasing the active role of judges in assessing the admission of guilt.
It was noticed that the courts have adopted an inappropriate practice in their assessment of the admission of guilt that is the courts accept the admission of guilt without it being substantiated by facts.
That is, during the reduced evidentiary hearing, only evidence about previous convictions is presented.
Recommendation: Reform of the Law on Criminal Procedure (LCP) in terms of introducing the authorization for the court to request the parties to present evidence in the proper quantity and quality so that the court can be able to fully accept the defendant’s admission of guilt or introducing provisions on special hearing to determine the type and extent of the sanction.
Rare application of the measures to secure the attendance of the defendant, which can serve as an alternative to the detention, even though the efficiency of such measures has been recognised in other more developed criminal justice systems.
Recommendation:  Introduction  of  adequate  mechanisms  for  application  and  control of milder measures that would enable the court to dispose of sufficient data and guarantees for efficient application of the respective measures.
Such mechanisms may be introduced through changes and amendments to the LCP and the Law on Probation, i.e. to incorporate these measures in the competences of the probation services.
Some inconsistency was noted regarding the legally prescribed order to present evidence, under the explanation that it results from the attempt to ensure the cost-effectiveness of the proceedings.
Recommendation: The provisions of the LCP that stipulate the order in which evidence is presented should be consistently applied.
High percentage of improper application of the provisions of the LCP that stipulate the direct examination, cross-examination and re-cross and re-direct examination of witnesses and expert witnesses was documented, and that this results from inappropriately mastered techniques for examination by the parties to the proceedings.
Recommendation: Additional training of the parties to the criminal proceedings will be required for the purpose of proper application of these provisions.
Unjustified frequent utilization of the court’s authorisation to pose questions once the examination of witnesses/expert witnesses is completed, and an activity of the court which may shift into a special hearing in specific cases.
Recommendation: Reform of the provisions of the LCP in order to ensure that such authorization of the court is eliminated.
Certain  failures  on  the  part  of  the  court  administrative  units  were  noted,  such  as inappropriate announcing of the time and place of court hearings.
Recommendation: Increase the courts’ publicity and transparency by ensuring that the time and place of the court hearings are publicly announced, both on the court’s website and within the court buildings.
Repeatedly noted practice of violating the procedural rights of the defence by restricting the access to evidence or hindering the insight into evidence.
Recommendation: Further improvement of the provisions in the LCP that would eliminate the practice of restricting the access of the defence to the prosecutorial evidence, as well as re-examination of the adopted rules on the costs for insight in the evidence and the transcripts thereof.
An upward trend in the percentage of verdicts which are not publically pronounced and announced.
Recommendation: Consistent application of the provisions from the LCP that stipulate the publicly pronouncing and announcing of verdicts.
Promoting a Multi-Stakeholder Approach to Preventing and Countering Violent Extremism and Radicalization that Lead to Terrorism
Summary report of roundtable discussions on the National Strategy for Countering Violent Extremism in the Republic of North Macedonia
Published by the Monitoring Unit of the OSCE Mission to Skopje.
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means - electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise - without the prior written permission of the publishers. This restriction does not apply to making digital or hard copies of this publication for internal use within the OSCE, and for personal or educational use when for non-profit and non-commercial purposes, providing that copies be accompanied by an acknowledgment of the OSCE as the source.
OSCE Mission to Skopje
The materials in this publication are for ease of reference only.
Although the OSCE Mission to Skopje has invested the utmost care in its development, it does not accept any liability for the accuracy and completeness of any information, instructions and advice provided or for any misprints.
The contents of this publication, the views, opinions, findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the OSCE.
For these reasons, no claims can be made against the OSCE in respect of potential consequences from the reliance on information or conclusions contained in this publication
Acknowledgments
The OSCE Mission to Skopje would like to thank Mission Members Alush Doda and Marina Mclellan for jointly developing and drafting the contents of this publication and designing, developing and implementing the activities that led to its compilation.
The OSCE Mission to Skopje would also like to thank our partners, Borche Petrevski, National Coordinator for Countering Violent Extremism and Countering Terrorism Xheladin Ajvazi, Deputy National Coordinator for Countering Violent Extremism Zlatko Apostoloski, Deputy National Coordinator for Countering Terrorism Marija Mihajloska Jankulovska, National Committee for Countering Violent Extremism and Counter Terrorism our implementing partner Center for Research and Policy Making, in particular Marija Risteska, Ivan Stefanovski and Aleksandar Cekov and Petar Arsovski.
We would like to express our gratitude to the roundtable participants for their contributions and collaboration, and extend a special acknowledgment to the Monitoring Unit of the OSCE Mission to Skopje for their support.
Glossary
This glossary serves to clarify key terms used in this report.
The definitions are for this report only and are not official OSCE definitions.
Community - women, men, social groups and institutions that are based in the same area and/or have shared interests.
Civil society – a diverse body of civil actors, communities, and formal or informal associations with a wide range of roles who engage in public life, seeking to advance shared values and objectives.
Civil society actors – key representatives of the community including women, youth, community and religious leaders who are well positioned to provide impactful and long-lasting contributions to the well-being of society.
Community policing – a philosophy and organizational strategy that promote partnerships between the police force and the public to increase the effective and efficient identification, prevention and resolution of problems of crime, and address concerns about physical safety and security, social disorder and neighbourhood decay in order to improve the quality of life for everyone.
Countering violent extremism – proactive actions to counter efforts by violent extremists to radicalize, recruit and mobilize followers to engage in violent acts and to address specific factors that facilitate and enable violent extremist recruitment and radicalization to violence.
Counter-terrorism – policies, laws and strategies developed by state actors and implemented primarily by law enforcement, intelligence agencies, and sometimes the military, aimed at thwarting terrorist plots and dismantling terrorist organizations
“Foreign terrorist fighters” – commonly used to refer to individuals who have travelled from their home states to other states to participate in or support terrorist acts, including in the context of armed conflict, especially in Iraq and Syria, as outlined in UN Security Council Resolution 2178 (2014).
The term is contested because of its breadth, vagueness, and associated human rights issues.
Former violent extremists or “formers” – individuals who have disengaged from a path to violent extremism and radicalization that lead to terrorism and who can have a useful role in raising awareness and communicating credible counternarratives.
Gender perspective – awareness and consideration of differential needs, experiences, and status of women and men based on socio-cultural context.
Intervention programming – programmes that target “at-risk” audiences and seek to intervene in a person’s pathway to terrorist radicalization before the line of criminal activity is crossed.
Prevention programming – programmes that seek to reduce the appeal of violent extremism and build resilience to its influence and spread.
The types of programmes that may fall under this category are: awareness raising on the threat of violent extremism in schools, public information campaigns and community debates, inter-faith and intra-faith dialogues, capacity building for teachers and community leaders in identifying and supporting those vulnerable to radicalization, media messaging and counter-/alternative narrative campaigns, and community trust building with law enforcement, etc.
Protective factors – positive characteristics or conditions that can moderate the negative effects of risk factors and foster healthier individuals, families, and communities, thereby increasing personal and/or community safety and wellbeing.
These factors can include expectation management, positive family or social networks, religious knowledge, education that teaches tolerance and respect for others, and a fairer job market.
Radicalization that leads to terrorism – the dynamic process whereby an individual comes to accept terrorist violence as a possible, perhaps even legitimate, course of action.
This may eventually, but not necessarily, lead this person to advocate, act in support of, or to engage in, terrorism.
Rehabilitation programming – programmes that target individuals radicalized to violence and possibly their families at different stages of radicalization.
The types of programmes include both prison-based de-radicalization/disengagement and post-criminal aftercare programmes focusing on the rehabilitation and reintegration of terrorist offenders and returning foreign fighters, and their reentry into society.
Some programmes offer educational and vocational training, counselling, employment opportunities and ideological re-education, etc.
Referrals – include individuals who are referred to multiagency or other multistakeholder programmes and who display observable behaviours indicating they might be at risk of or vulnerable to engagement in VERLT or already on the path to VERLT.
Referrals also include individuals whom a program refers to an agency, institution, organization, or professionals for an intervention or other support following a professional assessment of the individual’s risks, vulnerabilities, and protective factors.
Referral mechanism – a formal or informal mechanism involving practitioners and professionals from different disciplines and/or agencies and organizations that aims to identify, assess, assist, and treat those individuals showing signs of being at risk of or vulnerable to engagement in VERLT or already on the path to VERLT.
Resilience – the ability to withstand, respond to and recover from a wide range of harmful and adverse events.
Risk assessment – the process involving the systematic gathering and interpretation of information pertaining to an individual to provide data for properly trained professionals to make decisions relevant to the likelihood that a specific individual will engage in harmful action and to assess the nature and severity of the harm.
Risk assessment tool – a framework for collecting data to assist with decisionmaking that provides a non-discriminatory method for examining in a structured way an individual’s propensity to cause harm and the nature and severity of that risk, based on available information from multiple sources.
Risk factor – any attribute such as belief, appearance, experience, or environment that increases the likelihood of the outcome being measured (e.g., that an individual will engage in VERLT) occurring.
Whole-of-society approach – an approach to preventing and countering violent extremism advocated by policymakers and practitioners that envisions a role for multiple sectors and civil society actors in prevention, intervention, and deradicalization/disengagement rehabilitation programmes.
1. INTRODUCTION
The spread of violent extremism continues to pose a serious global challenge that the OSCE is committed to preventing and countering through its comprehensive approach to security while ensuring that human rights and the rule of law are respected.
The rapid rise of Daesh/ISIS in Iraq and Syria resulted in hundreds of foreign terrorist fighters leaving the Western Balkans to support their cause, including an estimated 110 citizens from the Republic of North Macedonia that may be higher given that no recent official data exist.
The dismantling of many Daesh safe havens since 2017 has also created a new set of challenges due to the flow of returning foreign terrorist fighters to the region.
At the same time, the threat of violent extremism continues to evolve, with new forms emerging – such as far-right movements and extreme nationalism – which further polarize societies and may also lead to community-based violence.
The OSCE Ministerial Council Declaration 4/15 affirms that terrorism and violent extremism cannot be linked to any race, ethnicity, nationality or religion.
It is widely acknowledged that violent extremism and radicalization that leads to terrorism (VERLT) is a complex problem with transnational dimensions, yet its drivers and solutions are closely tied to the context in which it exists.
In addition to national governments playing a vital role in coordinating and supporting early prevention activities, the OSCE also recognizes the need to place local stakeholders at the forefront of prevention efforts.
The importance of a multi-stakeholder approach to preventing and countering VERLT
In line with established best practice in the OSCE, P/CVERLT requires a holistic approach with the engagement of diverse institutions and civil society together with local communities.
In particular, a public health approach to prevention programming offers opportunities for practitioners to use lessons learned from the field of disease prevention through multi-stakeholder initiatives to identify risk and protective factors, build community resilience and promote healthy behaviours through community engagement.
These multi-stakeholder practices, when combined with community-led efforts to prevent violent extremism, have the advantage of broadly including social workers, mental health workers, psychologists and other health workers who are increasingly becoming involved in efforts to reduce violence in communities.
Using a whole-of-society approach recognizes the social roots of the phenomenon of violent extremism and allows for early interventions and non-coercive solutions when individuals or communities are at risk by addressing the factors conducive to VERLT.
The identification of sustainable solutions for building resilience to VERLT also necessitates a shift from past security-led approaches towards a greater emphasis on community-based prevention.
P/CVERLT efforts therefore seek to mobilize and empower stakeholders not traditionally associated with national security.
In contrast to countering terrorism, which uses a repressive approach in dealing with the criminal space, P/CVERLT is non-coercive in nature and focuses on preventing and countering processes of radicalization that may lead to terrorism.
As P/CVERLT efforts are undertaken in the pre-criminal space, they do not involve prosecutions, arrests, or other repressive measures.
The aim of P/CVERLT is accordingly not to reach individuals who have already crossed into the criminal realm, i.e. planning or undertaking terrorist activity, but rather to build resilience among communities seen as potentially vulnerable to the appeal of violent extremism and to assist individuals willing to disengage from violent extremism and reintegrate into their communities.
P/CVERLT focuses on addressing and reducing grievances and structural social, economic, and political conditions that may be conducive to violent extremism.
Violent extremists often work towards inciting individual and collective hatred, promoting intolerance towards diversity, and creating societal divisions.
Therefore, supporting the development of resilient and socially cohesive communities can be the best defense against violent extremism from taking root.
In working together, communities can counter the corrosive appeal of violent extremism by promoting tolerance, mutual respect, pluralism, inclusion, and cohesion.
Ultimately, P/CVERLT efforts should center on the wellbeing and safety of communities and individuals.
P/CVERLT efforts entail a broad range of programming that can include, for example, awareness raising, capacity building, counter and alternative narrative messaging, targeted programs for schools, extracurricular activities (e.g., youth and sports clubs), mentoring by religious and community leaders, and individually tailored interventions organized by local public institutions and psycho-social service providers.
These activities can be categorized according to whether they pertain to prevention, intervention, or rehabilitation and reintegration.
Rationale behind local-level roundtables
In February 2018, the OSCE Mission to Skopje, in partnership with the British Embassy, facilitated two public consultation roundtables with local stakeholders to inform the drafting of the Government’s revised Strategies and Action Plans for Countering Violent Extremism (CVE) and Counterterrorism (CT), under the National Committee for Countering Violent Extremism and Counter-terrorism (NCCVECT).
This effort for a consultative drafting process was the first in the region of the Western Balkans and one of few such examples globally.
Following the adoption of the National Strategy, the Mission organized a series of roundtables with key local stakeholders in fall 2018 as part of a strategic communications campaign in support of the NCCVECT to disseminate the Strategy. With the participation of the National Coordinator’s Office, the roundtables served to enhance transparency and ensure consistency in strategy messaging at the local level.
The roundtables were organized in ten geographically dispersed municipalities: Chair (Skopje), Gostivar, Kichevo, Kumanovo, Prilep, Shtip, Struga, Strumica, Tetovo, and Veles.
In order to promote a multi-stakeholder, community-based approach to the implementation of the National Strategy and Action Plan, the roundtables sought to include the participation of representatives from the municipal administration, civil society, local institutions, educators, psycho-social care providers, youth, religious leaders and other influential members of the local community.
Objectives of the roundtables
In addition to raising awareness of local stakeholders of the risks of VERLT, the primary aim of the roundtables was to foster ownership and buy-in from local institutions, civil society and communities for implementing the National Strategy and Action Plan for CVE.
The roundtables also provided a crucial opportunity to assess the needs and priorities in each Municipality for adopting a multi-stakeholder approach to implementing the National Strategy and Action Plan in the local context.
With consideration given to the sensitivities surrounding P/CVERLT, the Mission’s whole-of-society approach aimed to achieve a number of outcomes from the roundtables, including
Promoting a holistic understanding of violent extremism that addresses the phenomenon in all forms (e.g., right wing, exclusivist nationalist, political), thus reducing the stigma of ethnic and religious communities and allowing for broadened discussions on what forms of violent extremism exist in the country and in the local context.
Supporting a shift from the traditional security-led approaches towards emphasizing a whole-of-society approach that serves to empower community stakeholders by treating them as key parts of the solution.
Providing a safe space and platform for dialogue for participants to voice their concerns openly and initiate confidence-building both between local communities and with government structures.
Empowering stakeholders to establish channels for enhanced communication and co-operation.
Identifying potential challenges and opportunities for a multi-stakeholder approach to the implementation of the Strategy and Action Plan.
Clarifying roles and responsibilities between the central and local government, and between government and civil society.
Collaboratively identifying findings and recommendations to serve as a preliminary basis for the future development of local action plans.
This report provides a summary overview of the local stakeholder-led discussions in the ten municipal roundtables.
The next section provides a description of the methodology of the roundtables, followed by the key findings and conclusions.
The final section elaborates recommended best practices drawn from the findings for implementing P/CVERLT programming.
An annex provides a detailed overview into the proceedings of the roundtables in Chair, Gostivar, Kumanovo, Struga, and Tetovo in the form of reports developed by the OSCE Mission to Skopje’s implementing partner, the Center for Research and Policy Making (CRPM).
As one of its main objectives, the report seeks to highlight the importance of promoting a multi-stakeholder approach to implementing the National Strategy for CVE with an understanding of a shared responsibility for security.
The roundtable findings also serve to demonstrate the benefit of ensuring an inclusive process in the conceptualization and design of policies and strategies on P/CVERLT, both at the national and local level.
The report is written for a broad audience, including policymakers and practitioners who are working to develop and implement P/CVERLT policies, strategies, action plans, and programmes.
It is also specifically written for local stakeholders – including municipal authorities and other local institutions, and local practitioners and professionals, as well as members of civil society — who might be involved in the design and implementation of P/CVERLT programmes.
Finally, the report is also intended to raise awareness of the importance of trustbased collaboration between policymakers and practitioners when developing and realizing these programmes.
2. METHODOLOGY OF THE ROUNDTABLES WITH LOCAL STAKEHOLDERS
The Mission based the methodology of the roundtables on the same whole-ofsociety approach it applied in designing and carrying out the public consultations for the drafting of the National Strategy for CVE in early 2018.
In pioneering an ambitious and inclusive approach to promoting multi-stakeholder engagement in P/CVERLT, the roundtable methodology provides a valuable example of best practices for policymakers and practitioners involved in designing similar public outreach processes for other national strategies.
The following section provides an overview of the methodological approach used in selecting the municipalities and participants for the roundtables, as well as designing the structure of the guided discussions.
This section also discusses the harm reduction strategies and confidence-building measures used by the Mission when conducting outreach to local stakeholders.
Selection of municipalities and participants for the roundtables
The Mission, in coordination with the NCCVECT, selected the ten municipalities based on a list of criteria that ensured geographical diversity and avoided stigmatizing certain minority ethnic communities that could create the public perception that only these communities struggle with the challenge of VERLT.
Furthermore, allowing for broad coverage of the country in organizing the roundtables also shifted focus away from areas where ongoing and planned P/ CVERLT activities were already highly concentrated and reinforced the message that all forms of VERLT would be addressed.
In identifying participants for the roundtables, the Mission relied on its field presence to conduct outreach to an extensive network of stakeholders among local self-government institutions, civil society, educators, youth, religious and local community leaders, all of which play an important role in the community based-approach that is the basis of P/CVERLT.
In many cases, the roundtables represented the first time when all the relevant local stakeholders were brought together in the same room as part of a dialogue.
Intensive groundwork was carried out through numerous preparatory meetings with stakeholders to identify appropriate participants and to address any concerns, including risks of stigmatization.
In acknowledging the general lack of public awareness and sensitivity around P/CVERLT, the Mission focused on identifying individuals who had prior experience with the subject matter or whose work was in a closely related field.
In identifying participants, the Mission took great care to ensure diverse representation of all ethnic and religious communities present in each municipal context.
Particular emphasis was placed on ensuring that the needs and perspectives of the smaller minority communities were reflected in the roundtable discussions.
Participants were also invited from local women’s and youth groups to further enrich the discussion and empower these groups in building coalitions within civil society and to increase co-operation with local institutions.
The design of the roundtables had to contend with P/CVERLT’s legacy of predominantly focusing on religiously-inspired forms of VERLT, which has resulted in the stigmatization of certain religious communities and strained relations between these communities on the one hand and institutions and law enforcement on the other.
Another result of this legacy is that religious leaders often perceive that they are expected to have all the solutions to preventing and countering VERLT, even when they lack the appropriate capacities, resources, and necessary support from other stakeholders.
A whole-of-society approach to P/CVERLT avoids defining VERLT as a theological issue and thus placing the burden of responsibility solely on religious leaders, and instead recognizes VERLT as a social phenomenon that situates religious leaders among a collective of stakeholders committed to building community resilience.
In preparation for the roundtables, religious leaders were encouraged to use the open forum to express both their ideas and concerns while engaging in dialogue with the other stakeholders present. Additionally, in order to support trust-building, the Mission conducted on-the-ground outreach to local representatives of religious communities to clearly explain the purpose of the roundtables and address their grievances, particularly regarding stigmatization.
The preparatory meetings provided the opportunity to emphasize a holistic understanding of P/CVERLT, which encompasses all forms of violent extremism and refrains from targeting any particular ethnic or religious group, in addition to promoting a whole-ofsociety approach.
The Mission also sought to include teachers and other educational support staff (e.g., school psychologists, pedagogues) in the roundtables, given their important role in directly influencing the worldviews and values of youth during a critical period in their lives for their cognitive development and identity formation.
Teachers are also well placed to intervene and support a young person who may be struggling with or vulnerable to negative social phenomena.
At the same time, P/CVERLT efforts in the region tend to focus on building the capacities of educators to recognize signs of radicalization, with the risk of doing harm in the absence of proper training, instead of empowering them with the right tools to build the resilience of youth to VERLT (e.g., by reforming teaching methodologies and placing greater emphasis in the curriculum on fostering critical thinking, respect for diversity, and the promotion of non-violent behaviors).
With this in mind, the Mission also invited representatives of the regional units of the Bureau for Development of Education that work on developing school curricula, in addition to local education officers from the religious institutions who also play an important role in youth development.
Drawing from best practice in the domain of public health prevention efforts, the Mission also invited psycho-social care providers to participate in the roundtables.
Professionals in the fields of social welfare and mental health have extensive experience from initiatives supporting vulnerable individuals at risk of engaging in other types of negative social behaviors, such as youth delinquency.
Additionally, psycho-social care providers are bound by a professional code of ethics that governs the client-provider relationship through principles such as trust and emphasis on supporting the individual’s wellbeing.
Whereas an oversecuritized approach toward P/CVERLT with significant involvement of law enforcement can result in displacing and alienating psycho-social care providers, a public health approach creates the space for their engagement.
The purpose of including psycho-social care providers was thus to raise their awareness of VERLT and the important contribution they can make in bolstering protective factors.
Central to a do-no-harm approach in relation to VERLT is a nuanced understanding of community dynamics and sensitivities.
Given the sensitive nature of P/CVERLT, the Mission took into consideration the existing mistrust expressed by communities – especially minority ethnic communities -- towards institutions and law enforcement. Often in engagement efforts between police and the public, there is a perception that the security-driven agendas of law enforcement tend to displace other important local community concerns and grievances, especially when the interaction is one-way in nature.
Given the existing taboos around VERLT and the associated fears of negative repercussions from discussing the issue in the presence of law enforcement, the Mission prioritized the roundtables as a safe space for all participants to share their views on local problems and grievances.
Consequently, representatives of the police were not invited to the roundtables in order to ensure an open forum for discussion and to strengthen an understanding of P/CVERLT as a communitybased, multi-stakeholder effort carried out in a pre-criminal space.
This approach aimed to allow the community to feel engaged for their own benefit and that they too have an important stake in contributing to the security and wellbeing of their community.
Structure of the roundtables
Recognizing the taboos around VERLT and the general lack of public awareness in this area as of fall 2018, the Mission opted to structure the roundtables as fullday events to allow enough time for discussion to develop in sufficient depth.
Each roundtable accordingly began with an overview of key concepts and terminology to ensure that participants had a common understanding for the subsequent discussion sessions.
This conceptual session was then followed by a presentation of the National Strategy for CVE, led by the National Coordinator or his Deputy for CVE.
The active participation of the NCCVECT throughout the roundtables resulted in dynamic interaction between the central and local level by directly answering the queries of participants, as well as hearing first-hand their perspectives, grievances, and ideas for solutions.
The discussion sessions were organized around key intersectional areas and facilitated by an experienced moderator with the support of guiding questions prepared in advance of the roundtables.
Each of the thematic sessions allowed participants from all backgrounds to contribute to identifying local challenges and opportunities related to the implementation of the Strategy and Action Plan in the local context.
Participants were informed that the “Chatham House Rule” would be applied in order to protect their identity and allow for an open discussion.
The roundtable sessions were organized around the following themes
Violent extremism in the local context.
Empowering civil society and sharing best practices.
Engagement between the municipality and community.
Building trust between communities and law enforcement.
The role of communities in the prevention of violent extremism.
Education and supporting at-risk youth.
The importance of social welfare and mental health.
Taking into account the sensitivity of discussing violent extremism with local communities, the Mission placed considerable emphasis on selecting moderators and rapporteurs with appropriate skills and abilities.
An additional consideration in identifying moderators and rapporteurs was building civil society capacity in the field of P/CVERLT to continue working on long-term policy change.
Consequently, the Mission identified CRPM, a leading policy think tank that was carrying out research, together with the International Organization for Migration (IOM), in municipalities overlapping with those selected for the roundtables to assess local institutional capacities to implement the National Strategy.
By promoting synergies among initiatives, the Mission aimed to ensure that the research and roundtable discussions built upon each other for assisting the government, the local institutions and the civil society to create the best possible multi-stakeholder approach to P/CVERLT.
3. FINDINGS
This section provides an overview of the findings of the roundtables. Organized according to the structure of the sessions in most of the roundtables, the findings in each thematic area are complemented with attention to local specifics of particular interest.
3.1. Violent extremism in the local context
Taken together, the roundtables suggested that awareness of VERLT is generally low, and most roundtable participants took the position that violent extremism is not widespread in their municipality, though the issue of local citizens going to fight in Syria was raised in several roundtables.
Additionally, there was generally a high level of awareness that while violent extremism may start small, it can also grow quickly in the presence of visible examples/ role models.
It was also noted that discussion of VERLT is treated as a taboo, with the stifling effect on such discussion counterproductive from the standpoint of preventing violent extremism.
Participants also noted that violent extremism is most often associated with religious manifestations, resulting in the stigmatization of some communities, and identified right wing and nationalist extremism as also being prevalent in the country.
Notwithstanding the position of most roundtable participants that violent extremism is not widespread, the roundtables yielded evidence of the recognition of a fairly wide range of manifestations of the phenomenon.
On one end of the spectrum, roundtable participants mentioned graffiti expressing insults and violent intentions and/or ideas as a low-intensity form of violent extremism, with participants at the roundtable in Prilep noting also that the failure to remove such graffiti contributes to the normalization of such messages.
The roots of intolerance and hate first also manifest as verbal confrontations before escalating to physical violence, including most notably fights on inter-ethnic basis among secondary school students at schools and on public transportation.
Where hate speech and physical violence by sports (usually football) fan groups are concerned, the roundtables revealed widespread recognition of such activity as a form of violent extremism with participants in Chair noting alleged influence from political parties.
In Prilep, participants identified the burning of the Charshi Mosque and the effective expulsion of ethnic Albanian families in 2001 as an extreme manifestation of VERLT.
Discussion of the factors potentially conducive of VERLT pointed to the prominence of family-related concerns.
Common among roundtable participants was the view that the internal cohesion of families is not as strong as it once was, leading youth to seek identity and belonging in other kinds of groups, such as ethnic communities, political parties, religious communities, and sports fan groups.
In some roundtables, participants referred also to the absence of parents, often as a result of labor migration stemming from high unemployment.
At the roundtable in Chair, participants related the absence of a parent to increased vulnerability to extremist preachers.
Various issues of gender also received mention, including domestic violence, lack of respect for women in general, and, in Veles, conservative values preventing mothers from attending meetings in school.
In addition to family dynamics, roundtable participants identified a range of other causes of VERLT.
As mentioned above in relation to labor migration, economic conditions were frequently cited as a condition conducive to violent extremism.
As one participant in the roundtable in Veles put it, „We wouldn‘t be discussing these problems if [the living standard] were higher.“
Sometimes mentioned by roundtable participants in combination with poverty and unemployment was marginalization on ethnic and/or religious grounds.
Ethnic and religious marginalization was explained as a factor potentially influencing an individual’s search for identity and belonging in such a way as to make violent extremist groups more attractive.
Additionally, it was noted that some marginalized segments of society may seeks support from alternative religious groups outside of official religious institutions out of a perception that these groups are closer to the people and their needs.
Another type of cause identified in the roundtables relates to access to information.
As noted by roundtable participants, media often play a destructive role by spreading hate speech and playing up interethnic tensions in the way they cover incidents where the perpetrator is a member of a minority group.
Youth’s often unregulated access to mobile phones received frequent mention, and the hate speech common in media and social media was identified as a push factor toward violent extremism.
Also receiving frequent mention in the roundtables was the politicization of life and institutions in North Macedonia, sometimes in the form of incitement to extremism by political parties in power and by parties’ youth wings.
The storming of parliament on 27 April 2017 was mentioned in several roundtables as an example of political party involvement in violent extremism.
In Gostivar, participants pointed out that one extreme leads to another, especially where a culture of violence is normalized and politics is focused on hatred and/or revenge.
High levels of political polarization impede the functioning of institutions, leading in turn to a lack of public trust in those same institutions.
3.2. Empowering civil society and sharing best practices
Discussion of civil society in the roundtables pointed both to widespread recognition of civil society’s potential role in identifying and taking preventive action against various forms of violent extremism.
A wide range of variation across localities in civil society’s strength and relations with local communities and institutions was also noted.
While more capacity building on P/CVERLT is needed, participants also assessed that CSOs already have extensive experience in areas related to violence prevention and building social cohesion that could be better supported.
At the same time, participants urged caution towards involving CSOs that lack the appropriate expertise on P/CVERLT and suggested that more effort should be made to facilitate the sharing of best practices.
Participants also identified several areas in which CSOs can increase the focus of their activities in P/CVERLT, such as engaging parents in violence prevention, promoting human rights through nonformal education, and providing training to media organizations on conflict sensitivity in their reporting.
During the roundtable discussions, participants provided numerous examples of positive contributions by local CSOs to the prevention of violent extremism.
In Gostivar CSOs have been implementing various projects to build resilience within the local community, with relevant projects including digital skills training for marginalized youth and the opening of a youth center, as well as other initiatives focused on bringing together youth from diverse backgrounds.
As explained by roundtable participants, good relations between civil society and local government also led to the establishment in Gostivar of the country’s first municipal youth council however it was noted that the youth council faces challenges with insufficient funding for activities.
Some CSOs in Kumanovo have not only taken a public stand against violent extremism, but also undertaken preventive work with youth susceptible to joining violent extremist groups abroad.
Additionally, the roundtables in Prilep and Tetovo revealed civil society capacity built in providing assistance to vulnerable individuals that could potentially be applied in relation to preventing violent extremism.
At the same time, participants at the roundtables in Kumanovo and Prilep noted that CSOs struggle to sustain long-term programming due to a lack of funds, with the discussion in Kumanovo identifying the need for donors to take local priorities and existing programming into account in allocating their funding.
Participants at the roundtable in Kumanovo also noted that while local civil society is relatively strong in its own right, co-operation between CSOs, schools, and municipal authorities needs strengthening.
Moreover, even in Gostivar, where roundtable participants assessed the position and role of civil society positively, it was noted that civil society had suffered in the past from pressure exerted by the state through politically targeted audits and inspections.
While the roundtable discussions in several municipalities yielded insight into the strengths of local civil society to prevent violent extremism, the roundtables in Chair and Struga showed a less positive situation.
In these municipalities, co-operation between civil society and local institutions is characterized as weak, with low levels of trust and awareness about local CSO programming on the part of local authorities.
Participants in the roundtables in Chair and Struga also made note of negative public perceptions of CSOs in these municipalities as being influenced by personal, political, and/or criminal agendas that effectively undermine the idea of volunteerism and civic activism.
Additional findings from the roundtable in Chair include low levels of awareness on the part of CSOs about the availability of municipal premises for their activities, as well as difficulties experienced by CSOs in obtaining funding from the municipality.
Finally, participants at the roundtable in Chair pointed out that most locally active CSOs are humanitarian, with few organizations implementing cultural activities or activities designed to raise civic awareness and engagement.
Concern was also raised by religious communities that some foreign funded humanitarian organizations were allegedly carrying out activities with political or religious undertones and non-transparent motivations.
3.3. Engagement between the municipality and community
The findings of the roundtables suggest that levels of engagement between municipality and community vary widely in much the same way as the strength and role of civil society at the local level, as discussed above.
The provisions for coordination between municipality and community receiving most frequent mention at the roundtables were neighbourhood-level administrative units (mesni zaednici) and Local Prevention Councils (LPCs).
With regard to the former, participants in the roundtables in Kumanovo and Tetovo lamented the loss of neighbourhood-level administrative units’ status in 2002, as a result these units no longer have access to a bank account, official stamp or seal.
They described the units as an important and often effective mechanism for engagement between local authorities and local communities due to their overview of grassroots-level developments, but said the units encounter difficulties in resolving community issues because they function since 2002 on a voluntary basis.
Participants therefore urged that a new law be passed to reinstate the status of the local neighborhood units.
Where LPCs are concerned, the roundtables made clear that these mechanisms have the potential to serve as a municipality-led tool for ensuring that all stakeholders are included in discussing issues of public safety.
However, the absence of a legal requirement for all municipalities to establish LPCs, in addition to other challenges for multi-agency cooperation, has prevented the establishment and continued function of such a body in all of the municipalities in which the roundtables were held.
In Kumanovo, an LPC exists, but was characterized by roundtable participants as hardly functional as a result of appointments made on the basis of political affiliation rather than expertise.
Participants in other roundtables referred to the LPCs in their respective municipalities as inactive or never established, while participants in Prilep stated that were an LPC to be established in the future, it would be important to ensure broader focus than only VERLT.
Furthermore, participants suggested that LPCs should ensure that individuals with the appropriate competencies and commitment be included as permanent members to ensure consistency and sustainability.
In addition to different institutions, participants also proposed that representatives of CSOs and communities be included in the LPC configuration.
In the absence of a functioning LPC or other mechanisms that can be used for preventing violent extremism, the roundtables held in Gostivar and Kumanovo provided insight into existing and planned coordination bodies for addressing other types anti-social and violent phenomena.
In Gostivar, where participants made note of relevant, but unfunded, mechanisms for coordination (e.g., a coordination body for the prevention of gender-based violence) and also called on the municipality to take violent extremism more seriously, they also welcomed the signing of a memorandum of understanding with the CSO Search for Common Ground to establish a Community Action Team that will work on a local action plan for CVE and will advise the Municipal Council on related matters.
Community Action Teams have also been established in the municipalities of Chair and Kichevo.
At the same time, participants in this roundtable noted that many of the problems faced by the municipality need to be addressed at the central level.
In Kichevo, participants requested that representatives of smaller minority communities and from rural settlements be included in any coordinative body working on P/CVERLT to contribute towards identifying issues and solutions.
In Kumanovo, information on issues of public concern is shared among neighbourhood units, the Committee for Inter-Community Relations (CICR), and the security committee of the municipal council, with the sources protected.
In both Kumanovo and Kichevo, participants noted that although a Committee for Inter-Community Relations has been established, its voluntary character has made it difficult to address issues in a preventive manner, in addition to organize the annual meeting for drafting a program to be implemented by the Municipality’s cultural section.
Additionally, while the Municipality in Kumanovo maintains good relations with local religious organizations, there is no inter-religious body and generally little co-operation between religious communities.
More worrying, according to roundtable participants, is the lack of trust in institutions on the part of citizens, particularly among the more vulnerable segments of society, which often prevents them from receiving needed assistance.
Whereas the roundtables in Gostivar and Kumanovo yielded evidence of functional provisions for coordination between municipality and community in the prevention of violent extremism, discussion at the roundtables in Chair, Prilep, Tetovo, and Struga focused on the absence of such provisions.
At the roundtable in Chair, participants noted a lack of dialogue and co-operation between local communities and the municipality while pointing to the potential for the municipality to initiate community engagement through joint activities in the sphere of culture.
In Prilep, roundtable participants presented the now-defunct youth council for juvenile delinquency as an example of good practice for bringing together parents’ councils, education representatives, and providers of psycho-social services.
However, they also conveyed the perception that local authorities have avoided contact with the Islamic Religious Community (IRC) since the IRC requested the restoration of the Charshi Mosque.
Participants at the roundtable in Struga characterized the non-functioning of the LPC as symptomatic of a broader lack of inter-sectoral co-operation in the Municipality, also pointing to challenges in accessing and addressing the needs of the rural communities surrounding the town of Struga.
Finally, a barrier to engagement between municipality and community identified by participants of the roundtable in Tetovo was the municipality’s financial difficulties, including most notably the blocking of its bank account for several years.
3.4. Building trust between communities and law enforcement
Overall, the roundtables made clear that trust between communities and law enforcement is lacking for a number of different reasons.
In Struga and Tetovo, for example, participants attributed low levels of trust in law enforcement to the ineffectiveness of police in enforcing the law when the perpetrators of crimes are believed to be politically connected.
As explained by participants at the roundtable in Struga, the perceived inconsistent application of the law by police provides impunity for well-known local criminals, effectively promoting a life of crime as a viable option for youth.
In Tetovo and Chair, citizens are also afraid to report their concerns directly to the police for fear of retaliation from the perpetrators, and would prefer anonymous reporting.
The low representation of ethnic Albanians in various organs of the Ministry of Interior was also mentioned as a factor in the trust deficit, despite the existence of affirmative action for the equitable representation of ethnic communities in the police.
The recruitment of law enforcement officials on the basis of political party affiliation was mentioned in Chair and Kumanovo as a cause of low levels of citizen trust in law enforcement.
Widespread lack of trust in police was evident also in roundtable participants’ views expressed on the appropriate role of law enforcement in the prevention of violent extremism.
Participants in Chair, Kumanovo, and Tetovo conveyed fears of stigmatization and of being implicated by police in unnecessary investigations, with participants in Chair warning that disproportionate repressive measures targeting the local community risk creating fertile ground for the spread of VERLT.
Roundtable participants in Struga, on the other hand, expressed concerns about the capacity of police to deal with issues of prevention in addition to their existing caseload.
Reflecting these concerns, roundtable participants explained that police should be engaged only as a last resort or if there is an imminent threat to public safety.
Participants in Chair explained that community-based initiatives for preventing violent extremism in their municipality have made a point of not involving law enforcement officials for fear of doing harm, while participants in Gostivar emphasized that the strategic plan to be developed by the Community Action Team for prevention of violent extremism should avoid reliance on the police.
At the same time, participants called for more trust-building between communities and the police through an open forum as a mechanism to share their community safety concerns however, they noted that the police work from a highly centralized level which poses challenges to being able to address concerns raised in a timely manner.
Taking into account low levels of community trust in law enforcement, the roundtables also probed co-operation between law enforcement on the one hand and schools and centers for social work on the other.
While such cooperation generally received low marks from roundtable participants and most took the view that cases of youth delinquency should first be handled internally by school-based psycho-social support staff rather than involving police, roundtable participants in Strumica and Veles made note of good cooperation between police and schools.
Finally, notwithstanding roundtable participants’ predominantly negative views of the role of police in relation to preventing violent extremism, participants in some roundtables recalled previous community policing practices, such as patrolman (pozornikar9), in positive terms and pointed to their potential role in preventing violent extremism by maintaining contacts at grassroots level.
3.5. The role of communities in the prevention of violent extremism
Discussion of the role of communities in preventing violent extremism focused in large part on families and religious communities, with many roundtable participants voicing that the prevention of violent extremism begins at home and in early childhood development.
In several roundtables, participants emphasized that the focus should be on strengthening the family unit given it is the source for developing values of inter-religious and inter-ethnic tolerance.
Violence in the family should also be addressed to counter the normalization of violence in society more broadly.
Statements like these were often followed by observations about the potential for school-based parent councils to take an active role in raising awareness of the risks associated with violent extremism.
Moreover, parents should become more informed about their role in monitoring their child’s activity on the internet and ensuring their protection from online risks, including from content related to VERLT.
At the roundtable in Chair, participants spoke about the important role of women in preventing VERLT, noting that they can take the lead in their families to foster positive inter-religious and inter-ethnic relations, both proactively and in response to fights among youth at school and on public transport.
In this regard, the project “Mothers Schools” of the CSO Women without Borders received recognition from roundtable participants in Chair for empowering women to lead their families and communities in building resilience against VERLT.
In terms of dialogue and co-operation between religious communities, participants highlighted that on a higher level, the heads of religious communities meet twice a year to discuss activities, but at the local level there is insufficient communication between the Islamic Religious Community (IRC) and the Macedonian Orthodox Church (MOC).
Intensified co-operation is needed to foster tolerance, for example by engaging in joint activities of mutual interest (e.g. cleaning the litter in a park) at the local level.
Participants at the roundtable in Kumanovo singled out as an example of good practice the forum for religious leaders organized after the violent incidents in May 2015 to discuss how best to prevent further escalation of the situation.
Also common were calls from representatives of both the IRC and the MOC for the incorporation of ethics and religion classes in school curricula, taught by appropriately qualified teachers, to promote ethics and religious tolerance.
The roundtable discussions also examined the relationship between the construction of religious spaces of worship and symbolic objects on the one hand and interethnic and inter-religious relations on the other.
Whereas in most cases this relationship was described in terms of how the construction of religious buildings can provoke inter-communal tensions, the discussion in Struga also highlighted how religious leaders played a constructive role in preventing an escalation to violence in the village of Oktisi over the construction of a church without a permit.
From a different perspective, participants explained that some religious communities have longstanding grievances that should be addressed.
Mentioned in the roundtables in both Prilep and Gostivar, the failure of local authorities to restore the burned down Charshi Mosque in Prilep from the 2001 conflict has prevented true reconciliation between ethnic and religious communities.
As a result, there remains considerable need for work on inter-religious dialogue in that municipality.
At the roundtable in Gostivar, the low level of communication between religious communities and local institutions was explained in terms of the legacy of communism and its propagation of anti-religious views.
Beyond references to specific religious communities, participants in some roundtables called for greater transparency and regulation within religious institutions in general as one participant in the roundtable in Veles put it, “We can’t know what the priest and the imam say.
We need to see what they’re preaching.”
In addition, MOC representatives participating in one of the roundtables pointed to cases in which individuals espousing extreme beliefs seek to manipulate national and religious identities, noting that some priests and members of the Church have an ideological approach and are difficult to keep under control.
Among the concerns raised at the roundtables in relation to Muslim communities in North Macedonia, the most common related to the challenges for IRC of addressing the misuse of religion in such a way as to prevent VERLT.
At several roundtables, representatives of IRC spoke of foreign and/ or “extremist” organizations that carry out religious activities outside the control of official religious bodies, sometimes under the guise of cultural and humanitarian activities.
Participants at the roundtables in Gostivar and Struga also noted that their reports to police about such practices have not led to action.
In Gostivar, roundtable participants further made note of the circulation of large quantities of religious literature without IRC oversight, arguing that VERLT can be prevented by increasing religious literacy and promoting a strong grounding in the Hanafi tradition officially followed in the country.
Similarly, participants at the roundtable in Gostivar suggested that religious leaders should raise their profile on online social media to reduce the influence of extremist preachers among youth and offer alternative narratives.
Furthermore, participant sin Kumanovo emphasized that religious leaders should consider how they can better engage youth to understand the modern challenges and realities that they face.
While much of the discussion on communities focused on religious communities, some roundtable participants attended also to broader macrosocial phenomena, such as hooliganism among sports fans groups and incitement to violence by youth wings of political parties.
Participants at the roundtable in Chair identified the culture of violence in some sports fan groups as springboards to political and religious extremism, on the one hand pointing to a special relationship between such groups and political parties, and on the other hand alleging that several known foreign terrorist fighters who left North Macedonia to fight in Syria and Ukraine had previously been part of sports fan groups.
In Tetovo and Kumanovo, participants emphasized that working with football clubs and their fan groups should be a top priority to prevent the use of hate speech and nationalistic violent extremism.
In the view of participants in Chair, a special body should be created to regulate sports fans groups and sanction them for misconduct.
They also called on all types of community stakeholders to collectively condemn violence and hate perpetrated by sports fan groups.
In this regard, participants in Chair shared that the MOC had attempted to establish contact out to a well-known sports fan group in Skopje, known for inciting violent incidents based on ethnic and religious intolerance, in order to promote positive moral values.
Participants in the majority of the roundtables expressed concern that political parties spread extremism and nationalist rhetoric that creates polarization in society.
In regards to youth wings of political parties, participants in Prilep voiced that they can potentially play a constructive role in preventing their members from propagating negative narratives, hate speech and violence.
Participants in both Struga and Kichevo noted incidents of violence had occurred in the past between youth in schools incited by political parties during election periods.
Finally, participants at the roundtable in Kumanovo noted that the local community at large struggles to prevent hate speech in social media and to dispel fake news from having a detrimental impact on society.
3.6. Education and supporting at-risk youth
Roundtable participants identified various challenges faced by youth that contribute to their vulnerability to violent extremism.
At several of the roundtables, participants referred to pessimism and demoralization resulting from not only from a lack of direct opportunities, but also from the absence of positive role models in a society in which success apparently comes from personal connections rather than from skills, experience, and integrity.
In this situation, participants noted that youth may seek a sense of belonging by engaging in extreme outlets therefore youth need opportunities for positive mentorship and to gain leadership skills to make meaningful contributions to society.
In support of the thesis that youth need to feel understood and that they belong to their communities, participants at the roundtable in Kumanovo recalled the case of a girl who left for (and was eventually killed in) Syria because she felt deeply marginalized when she decided to express her religiosity openly.
On a more positive note, participants at the roundtable in Gostivar spoke of the youth council and center established in that municipality as promising mechanisms for addressing some of the challenges faced by at-risk youth.
The roundtables revealed major shortcomings in the operation of the education system in North Macedonia which greatly reduce the system’s ability to provide viable alternatives for at-risk youth.
One of the prominent findings of the roundtables is that VERLT among youth in North Macedonia feeds on deep societal cleavages as reflected in the education system.
In the first place, segregation by language of instruction limits contacts among pupils from different ethnic – and, in many cases, also religious – communities.
Participants at the roundtable in Tetovo further attributed the current situation of segregation to the inability of relevant institutions to handle the renaming of schools in ways that would not create “winners and losers”.
Moreover, in most schools, little is done to promote multiculturalism among students, and some textbooks contain offensive and nationalist-oriented material that contributes to polarization and marginalization, particularly in relation to ethnic minorities.
Finally, participants at the roundtables in Chair, Kumanovo, and Prilep expressed concerns about the effects on students of extremist views held by teachers, with participants in Chair citing a concrete case in which a member of teaching staff had incited violent extremism in the classroom.
By way of contrast, a participant in the roundtable in Shtip cited the example of a local primary school in which good interethnic relations are cultivated actively and friendships across ethnic lines have proven effective in preventing VERLT.
In several roundtables, participants made reference to manifestations of political polarization in the school system.
Some participants observed that the tendency for teachers to be employed on the basis of political affiliation makes for considerable unevenness in the level of skills among teaching staff.
This tendency places teachers in a difficult position to communicate to school management what is needed to increase the quality of education, compounding the overburdening of teachers that comes with large class sizes and which prevents individual work with students, especially at-risk youth.
Perhaps more troubling are the cases reported by roundtable participants in which well-connected teachers and students brought weapons onto school premises and issued threats to teachers and/or students, contributing to normalization of a culture of violence.
Taking into account the phenomena described in the preceding paragraphs, there is perhaps nothing surprising in the finding of research cited by roundtable participants in Prilep that students lack trust in and are therefore tend to be unwilling to share their concerns with teachers and school support services.
Nonetheless, participants at the roundtables in Chair and Kumanovo provided accounts of good practice in providing support to at-risk youth.
In Chair, when a child displays deviant behavior, the child’s teacher invites the parents to discuss together with a pedagogue and school psychologist.
In Kumanovo, roundtable participants reported excellent co-operation between school professional services and local CSOs.
Roundtable participants highly agreed on the value of extracurricular activities for providing youth with access to constructive free-time activities.
At the same time, however, participants noted that widespread overcrowding of schools that leads to operation in two or more shifts means that many schools lack the space in which to offer extracurricular activities, even if they are planned in the school program.
It was also mentioned in the roundtables that the most vulnerable students are also most likely to be excluded from such activities, as priority is often given to better-performing students.
In Gostivar and Tetovo, municipal authorities have taken steps to address this situation by allocating resources for extracurricular activities: the youth and community center in Gostivar brings together six youth organizations, while the municipality of Tetovo has provided space and logistical support to a recently created network of youth volunteers who serve as hosts for activities.
A topic arousing some debate among roundtable participants was the potential for local councils for prevention of juvenile delinquency to play a role in preventing violent extremism.
Participants in Tetovo and Veles were generally positive about this, while a participant in Shtip took the position that such councils are not appropriate for addressing VERLT.
It was also mentioned in the roundtables that the youth organizations of political parties need to be engaged in efforts to prevent violent extremism.
3.7. Social welfare and mental health
Given that potential drivers for VERLT include social marginalization and chronic unemployment, the roundtable discussions also explored measures taken by social welfare institutions to address these phenomena, in particular how they impact youth.
Additionally, it was pointed out that measures for addressing unemployment tend to focus on persons with completed secondary or higher education, leaving out traditionally marginalized groups such as Roma.
A common observation of roundtable participants is that while centers for social work have extensive experience addressing different forms of antisocial behaviours, they lack specialized expertise on understanding violent extremism and its associated risks.
Furthermore, social work centers lack the resources necessary to develop and deploy relevant capacity, with participants in Kumanovo noting that employees of the local center were already working on a voluntary basis to implement existing programming.
One suggestion was for a centralized center with a pool of mobile experts to be established to advise practitioners at the local level.
The roundtables also highlighted the need for social work centers to work more closely with elementary and secondary schools to provide support to vulnerable youth.
In light of the fact that most teachers lack the time and skills necessary to actively support students’ social development, the role of schoolbased psycho-social support staff takes on particular importance.
However, political polarization and overcrowding in schools generally affect this category of staff in much the same way that teaching staff are affected, with many school populations too large for the number of psycho-social support staff employed and some schools lacking a pedagogue and/or a psychologist.
Even where such staff exist in sufficient number, they often lack training for understanding the phenomenon of radicalization to violent extremism and how it can be addressed.
Participants noted that it is important for youth to feel listened to, to be able to express themselves, and to feel they can identify their problems and concerns to trusted adults.
Therefore, teachers, pedagogues, school psychologists and parents need to become more involved in better engaging youth.
In addressing youth delinquency and violent behaviour, participants also urged that such cases first be handled internally by a school’s pedagogues and psychologists instead of prematurely involving the police.
Furthermore, it was proposed that specialized programs should be created for youth to deconstruct the normalized culture of violence and aid in processing global news and events that may be disturbing to the psyche of young people.
Participants also noted that social work centers should concentrate more on addressing family dysfunctionality, as family violence can further encourage violent and extremist behavior of young individuals.
Such efforts would also support the work of psycho-social support staff in schools who under recent legislation have been prevented from accessing information on the family background of students despite substantial evidence that a large proportion of students requiring support come from socially disadvantaged and/or dysfunctional families.
Some roundtable participants also observed that centers for social work are not always willing to assist school-based psychosocial support staff when contacted about a particular student.
Participants also identified that local social work centers should be engaged in implementing programs for rehabilitation and reintegration of referred individuals assessed as vulnerable to VERLT.
The roundtable in Struga also pointed to the absence of knowledge on how individuals being released from the prison system can be properly resocialized and reintegrated into communities with adequate support to ensure that they do not become vulnerable to violent extremist groups.
In some roundtables it was suggested that religious leaders can play a role in providing mentorship on a theological basis during rehabilitation and reintegration, although they often lack more specialized training in providing psychological support and counselling.
Finally, the roundtables highlighted that social and cultural taboos around mental health leads to stigmatization and additional barriers for individuals to access mental health support services in the community.
4. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
This section provides conclusions, combined with a few recommendations, on issues that were identified as challenges during the discussions.
They are synthesized from the findings in each thematic area and provide guidance on how to promote a multi-stakeholder approach to P/CVERLT.
4.1. Capacities for a whole-of-society approach to P/CVERLT (trained staff infrastructure finances)
4.1.1. Adequately trained staff
The whole-of-society approach to P/CVERLT was supported in all of the roundtables organized.
However, one of the main challenges identified during the discussions was the lack of training to ensure understanding and awareness of principles and approaches promoted by the central government through national strategies and action plans.
Stakeholders agreed this was a systemic deficiency appearing during coordination with their mother institutions, and noted that this deficiency is particularly apparent where no institution has been tasked with taking the lead in addressing crosscutting issues.
The participants raised concerns regarding the involvement of teachers in P/CVERLT.
A general perception of the educators in all areas was that they consider themselves inadequate to engage in prevention unless they possess a certain level of expertise.
Specialized training of educators was prioritized at almost every roundtable.
The recommendation arising from these concerns was that special attention should be given to ensure that P/CVERLT interventions respect human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the rights of children.
In most roundtables, CSO representatives repeatedly brought to the attention of educators and others that existing skillsets can be applied to prevention programming.
These skills may include (but need not be limited to) mentorship and counselling, pedagogical support, active or strategic listening, communication skills, mediation, and critical thinking.
As a result, participants in most roundtables displayed a change of perceptions regarding their abilities to engage in P/CVERLT after the initial discussions, as their awareness increased on existing skills that can be used.
At the same time, if the training of teachers is not adequate and in line with human rights and a do-no-harm approach, there is a risk that it could result in oversimplification of key issues.
Social workers and psychologists requested respect for the autonomy of their professional fields.
While expressing willingness to participate in prevention programming, participants in these categories emphasized the need to resist requests from law enforcement agencies to break the ethical codes that ensure trust from the beneficiaries of psychosocial support.
In some municipalities, social workers and psychologists participating in the roundtables presented successful inter-institutional co-operation in preventing other anti-social behaviours, such as juvenile delinquency.
In the opinion of these participants, capacities of professional staff need to be increased and a thorough understanding of P/CVERLT concepts provided through specialized training.
Representatives of municipalities and local institutions requested specialized training be provided by the central-level authorities and the National Committee for Countering Violent Extremism and Counter-terrorism (NCCVECT).
More specifically, each of the ministries represented in the NCCVECT should provide training at the local level before attempting to create local implementation plans on P/CVERLT.
The high turnover of staff in some institutions hinders the sustainability of capacity building, as well as of preventive mechanisms that could be established on the local level.
Participants also recommended that an assessment of compatibility should be conducted for anyone who wants to be involved in P/CVERLT interventions, as some professionals in their field may express views supportive of or conducive to VERLT.
4.1.2. Infrastructure
The latest global trends demonstrate that communities have a crucial role to play in the prevention of violent extremism, with community-based approaches to prevention proving beneficial in supplementing the law-enforcement approach to security.
The biggest challenge identified by communities was the lack of infrastructure, whether physical or soft (i.e., institutions), for providing a space and forum for communities to contribute to prevention.
Even though all participants agreed that governments cannot prevent and counter violent extremism alone, communities requested that national strategies reflect the need to build physical and soft infrastructure for P/CVERLT.
Roundtable participants pointed to the limited extra-curricular funds of schools and a systemic lack of space.
They also noted a shortage of psychologists despite repeated requests.
On the other hand, some municipal authorities have informally designated places for work with youth or community outreach.
There was broad agreement among roundtable participants that partnerships for preventing VERLT are best formed by communities themselves, with support from institutions and civil society organizations.
However, there remains a need for central and local authorities to coordinate community efforts by creating an infrastructure to support the work of communities, local institutions and civil society organizations.
The local institutions acknowledged that there are ambiguities in defining the roles of stakeholders in prevention.
One of the biggest concerns is the lack of recognition of prevention as a general competence, whether by municipalities that have competence over schools, or by social and healthcare facilities or other institutions.
In order to promote a multi-sector approach, channels of communication and co-operation need to be established.
Most local institutions are restricted in their interactions by their mother institutions at the central level and do not give legitimacy to requests from other institutions, resulting in action taken only when requested by the mother institution or other central authorities.
4.1.3. Finances
One of the main concerns expressed by stakeholders participating in the roundtables was that they lack finances to engage in P/CVERLT activities or interventions.
The institutional stakeholders reported that they lack flexibility in their budgets that are pre-determined by their mother institutions.
Community and religious leaders, on the other hand, lack resources and capacity to manage funds.
For their part, municipal representatives noted that they could find modalities to fund P/CVERLT interventions, but the funds would be limited and would be taken from funds for other obligations of the municipality.
On the other hand, the CSOs dealing with P/CVERLT or related issues stated that finances were not their biggest concern, pointing instead to the need for more institutional support and capacity building training.
Throughout the roundtables, the National Coordinator on CVE and CT and the two Deputy Coordinators reassured stakeholders that donors are interested to fund local initiatives.
At the same time, they specified that in order to get funds, a local implementation plan should be developed in accordance with the National Strategy on CVE.
In several municipalities, requests were made that donors consult with communities on needs and priorities prior to planning interventions.
4.2. Inter-agency co-operation
The most difficult segment to address in promoting a multi-stakeholder approach is inter-agency co-operation.
While such co-operation is difficult in any thematic area, in the case of P/CVERLT it is made more challenging by a legacy of securitization.
Particularly in municipalities where no P/ CVERLT initiatives had been implemented, local institutions were struggling to understand their role in addressing violent extremism when contacted during preparation of the roundtables.
As a result, the roundtables served as an excellent forum for debate, raising awareness, breaking taboos about securitized topics, and promoting co-operation and community inclusiveness.
At the roundtables, good practices and lessons learned were shared in regards to multi-stakeholder bodies formed to address various issues.
Generally, institutions did not have any criteria for delegating or appointing appropriate staff to such committees or bodies.
Additionally, the inadequate expertise of members undermined the credibility and the functioning of such efforts.
This situation was exacerbated by political polarization within relevant institutions, as experts in their field were not promoted to work in multistakeholder bodies because other individuals have been politically appointed.
The lack of a hierarchy and reporting lines for the work of the multi-stakeholder bodies resulted in no accountability for actions to be taken.
Members of such bodies reported not receiving support from their managers, who failed to recognize the bodies’ competence in prevention, as well as the legitimacy of the conclusions and decisions issued by such bodies.
The lack of incentives such as financial compensation for regular participation in the bodies’ work was also identified as detrimental for multi-stakeholder bodies.
Justification for absence from work was also mentioned as an issue leading to problems in coordination for meetings.
Vertical and horizontal co-operation is lacking in various areas relating to P/CVERLT. Roundtable participants noted that local institutions generally work in isolated silos in the municipalities.
As a result, representatives of these institutions are often not aware of the activities of others and overlap in issues or work with the same stakeholders.
In light of this situation, a multistakeholder approach can be expected to increase awareness and co operation.
To date, various multi-stakeholder bodies had been formed in the selected municipalities for prevention against specific categories of anti-social behaviours such as juvenile delinquency and alcohol- or drug-related harm.
Local Prevention Councils and Citizen Advisory Groups, initially promoted by the OSCE Mission to Skopje, were mentioned as positive examples of existing preventive mechanisms in some municipalities.
However, many challenges were raised in different municipalities for establishing fully functioning preventive mechanisms.
Most importantly, the participants pointed to the need to assess unsustainable mechanisms and gather information on why such bodies ceased to function, as a basis for improving the design of preventive mechanisms for P/CVERLT that may be established.
4.3. Coordination between central and local authorities
The distribution of responsibilities and the mechanisms for interaction between local and central authorities are governed by principles laid down in the European Charter of Local Self-Government.
The general competence clause specifies that allocation of powers and responsibilities by law goes together with the recognition of the power of local authorities to intervene in any matter of local interest.
Consistent with this, roundtable participants took the position that the municipalities are best placed to support a multistakeholder local prevention mechanism and other P/CVERLT initiatives.
Municipal representatives stated that in order for such initiatives to function properly, the central government should establish co-operation and provide capacity building training.
They identified discrepancies between national and local priorities of institutions and the difficulty of requesting changes in the budget as the biggest challenges in trying to focus their work in a new area such as P/CVERLT.
There was a consensus from all local institutions in the selected municipalities that national top-down support needs to be established for all sensitive areas and especially for P/CVERLT.
Local institutions also reported difficulties in allocating time and resources, and the inability to implement action plans when local-level issues are not reflected in the national action plans.
Skopje and Tetovo were the two municipalities that were most receptive to organizing the roundtables discussed in this report, after the OSCE Mission to Skopje had earlier in the year held public consultations on the National Strategy and Action Plan on Countering Violent Extremism.
This demonstrated that the inclusion of all stakeholders in decision-making on a local level promotes buy-in and commitment to a national-level action plan, as it addresses local dynamics and community grievances.
For their part, central authorities acknowledge municipalities as the institutions that play a critical role in the interface with citizens.
Roundtable participants recommended that the central government consider developing mechanisms for the integration of multiple stakeholders for the management of policies and regulations affecting municipalities, especially policies dealing with sensitive topics.
Lack of horizontal and vertical communication was mentioned as the cause for the passiveness of institutions and absence of activities in prevention of VERLT.
Continuous inter-institutional communication is of utmost importance for a successful implementation of policies, as it favours a better understanding of policies and allows monitoring, assistance, advice and consultation regarding disputes.
This being the case, regular briefings should be held by national institutions to inform relevant stakeholders on the national and local level on strategic actions taken in addressing VERLT.
Continuous training of professionals working in prevention of violent extremism was also proposed, as one-off trainings do not provide appropriate support and guidance in dealing with the phenomenon of violent extremism.
This request was particularly common among educators and professional school staff, who pointed to the unmet need for ongoing professional development in the area of prevention of VERLT and other antisocial behaviours.
While the municipalities have general competency over education, changes to curricular activities need the approval of the Bureau for Development of Education, providing further evidence of the need for a multi-stakeholder approach to P/CVERLT.
Researchers face difficulties in obtaining VERLT data and statistics, which are mostly classified.
State institutions also need statistical data for proper planning of strategies and action plans.
Ideally, the needed data could be obtained locally by researchers communicating with practitioners and local stakeholders, then shared with the national coordination bodies.
Such efforts were mentioned by civil society representatives with experience in creating networks of practitioners working in the same area.
However, local institutions, municipalities and central government actors pointed to challenges in establishing a framework for co-operation, especially where both vertical and horizontal co operation are concerned.
Generally, the failure of local institutions to recognize their role in prevention has undermined institutional responses to addressing VERLT.
The general perception of most local institutions was that once the problem appears, they will act in order to mitigate harm and address consequences.
Only a few municipalities that had already seen good practices and results from a multistakeholder approach were receptive to addressing VERLT through similar coordinated, multi-stakeholder bodies.
The general consensus was that more work needs to be done to enable institutions to support prevention initiatives at the local level, and that coordination between central and local activities is crucial in order to operationalize the strategies and action plans on CVE.
5. RECOMMENDED BEST PRACTICES FOR P/CVERLT PROGRAMMES
This section presents key recommendations for best practices that can be applied in designing and implementing P/CVERLT programmes.
The recommended best practices are derived from the insights and lessons learned from the roundtable findings taken together as a whole.
1. Advocate for broad stakeholder co-operation using a whole-ofsociety approach.
Bring together relevant stakeholders from across civil society and different institutional sectors, specifically ensuring inclusion of practitioners with experience in the prevention of other forms of violence and risky social behaviours.
This approach recognizes the social roots of VERLT and allows for early interventions and noncoercive solutions when individuals or communities are at risk by addressing the factors conducive to VERLT.
2. Tailor programmes to the local context by prioritizing demanddriven solutions.
Each municipality has its own particular context and challenges that preclude a one-size-fits-all approach to implementing the National Strategy and Action Plan.
A local needs assessment should be conducted that includes an analysis of all forms of VERLT phenomena and the resources that can be leveraged in prevention.
Efforts should be made to build upon existing capacities and programming of local civil society.
3. Give local stakeholders a direct stake in P/CVERLT programmes.
Promote genuine empowerment of local stakeholders through their consultation and participation in decision-making processes facilitate the inclusion of marginalized and under represented groups, such as minority communities, youth and women, who may also bring different voices and needs to the table.
4. Apply a conflict-sensitive lens in planning and designing programmes.
Understand local dynamics and sensitivities around inter-ethnic, religious, and political divisions that cause tensions and mistrust, as well as the need for trust-building between citizens and institutions, such as law enforcement.
Take steps to promote confidencebuilding and community dialogue on sensitive issues relating to VERLT.
Where possible, seek to address the legacy of local and national conflicts and community grievances as factors conducive to VERLT.
5. Prioritize human rights considerations and the principle of do-noharm.
Conducting a thorough risk assessment in project design is crucial for mitigating inadvertent stigmatization or infringement on human rights and fundamental freedoms, such as freedom of religion or belief.
Ensure that P/CVERLT efforts do not disproportionately engage with a particular ethnic or religious community in order to avoid interpretation of such efforts as profiling or discrimination.
Professional ethics and safeguards are also needed when working with children and adolescents that protect the specific rights and wellbeing of persons in these groups by preventing exposure to undue stigmatization.
6. Ensure that solutions to P/CVERLT are people-centred.
Efforts should focus on strengthening the protective factors for resilient communities and supporting the wellbeing of individuals.
Overly securitized approaches risk undermining partnerships with communities and institutional stakeholders by focusing on threat detection instead of addressing the underlying factors of VERLT and providing the necessary support to vulnerable individuals.
Care should also be taken to respect the independence, normative values and professional commitments of practitioners in civil society, education, religious institutions, mental health and social welfare.
7. Exercise caution around prematurely involving law enforcement.
Building police-community partnerships based on trust and collaboration requires cultivating sustained relationships over time, which should be in place first before engaging local communities on the highly sensitive issue of VERLT in order to avoid misunderstandings and stigmatization.
In cases concerning vulnerable individuals, the involvement of the police in what is a non-criminal space when no credible threat is imminent, may lead to stigmatization and possibly push an individual further down the path of radicalization.
8. Coordinate efforts of the central and local government and the international donor community.
Oversaturation of activities and the attendant disproportionate level of attention to P/CVERLT in a particular community can result in displacement of other important issues.
This situation can in turn lead to targeted stigmatization and overburdening of resources.
9. Incorporate gender considerations in the design of P/CVERLT initiatives.
Promote the meaningful empowerment of women in shaping efforts to prevent violence by creating genuine opportunities to play a transformative role in society.
Avoid instrumentalizing the participation of women for the purpose of furthering a particular security agenda while displacing other concerns, such as advancing women’s rights.
Ensure that efforts to involve women in P/CVERLT do not reinforce traditional gender roles, stereotypes and inequalities, and do not put them at additional risk.
10. Ensure the sustainability of P/CVERLT initiatives.
Make use of existing preventive mechanisms where possible, and incorporate lessons learned and good practices in the creation of new mechanisms.
Establish a framework for co-operation among stakeholders by delineating roles and channels of communication, also providing appropriate incentives and support to ensure continued engagement.
Where possible, seek to engage stakeholders who demonstrate a clear interest and commitment to P/CVERLT.
Before the conflict in 2001, but especially in the aftermath, inter-ethnic and religious cleavages in Chair were not managed successfully, creating fertile ground for religious and ethnic radicalization leading to violence.
There was a clear consensus among the present discussants that a lot has to be done in order to make Chair a safe space resilient to radicalization.
The fragile community relations have contributed towards religious intolerance between the two largest religious communities in the municipality – Muslims and Orthodox Christians.
Furthermore, the animosity between local members of sports fan groups, which have a history of ethnic and religious hatred, makes Chair and the surrounding municipalities less safe and prone to inter-ethnic and inter-religious clashes.
Lastly, segregation in schools is one of the driving factors that contribute towards radicalization leading to violent extremism.
Strengthening of civil society and sharing best practices
In regards to strengthening civil society and sharing best practices on the community level, CSO representatives noted the clear need for the creation of a statistical database of foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs) who have returned to North Macedonia.
This database should be made available to researchers and professionals for research purposes.
Representatives from local CSOs also stressed the need to increase co-operation with the international community to organize facilitated discussions with sports fan groups on the municipal level, considering that multiple nationalist and ethnically based crimes have been committed by members of these groups on the territory of Chair.
Lastly, it was noted by local media representatives that CSOs should collaborate with local institutions and communities, as well as with international organizations in order to raise awareness about critical thinking, media literacy and promoting democratic culture.
Media (with emphasis on local media)
Local journalists continued emphasized the importance of both national and local media, noting that media have the responsibility to report carefully in a balanced and non-sensationalistic manner in order not to provoke violence and radicalization leading to violent extremism.
Trust-building between local community and law enforcement institutions in terms of prevention – institutional mechanisms
Local community leaders, as well as the NCCVECT representatives, highlighted the need for further efforts to be invested in trust-building between local communities and law enforcement agencies.
In particular, it was noted that long-term and sustainable solutions are needed.
Multiple stakeholders agreed that in the framework of the potential referral mechanism, the police should be engaged only as a last resort, mainly due to its repressive nature.
Furthermore, careful consideration needs to be given to the role of law enforcement institutions in the creation of local prevention mechanisms.
Local self-government, local communities and other local stakeholders
Several discussants noted that all local stakeholders should invest efforts to prevent stigmatizing certain ethnic, religious, or political groups as being linked to radicalization and violent extremism.
This is of utmost importance for ethnically and religiously mixed municipalities such as Chair.
CSO representatives mentioned that the established LPC in Chair should intensify its activities and follow closely phenomena such as radicalization and violent extremism.
A couple of youth activists pointed out that the Municipality of Chair should invest in opening the youth center and make it a youth engagement hub.
The same discussants pointed out that the Municipality of Chair should build upon the positive experience of the Municipality of Tetovo in order to encourage youth volunteering and to provide space and funding for young people to engage socially in order to be more creative.
Both civil society leaders and municipal representatives mentioned that political party youth organizations should be more engaged as P/CVERLT stakeholders on the local level.
The same groups of discussants further noted that public and political officials should show enhanced sensitivity when using religious and ethnic symbols, taking into consideration the multiethnic character of Macedonian society, as well as the multi-ethnic and multi-confessional character of Chair.
Lastly, there was a consensus that every type of nationalist outburst should be publically denounced and sanctioned.
Local religious leaders
Multiple discussants from different professional backgrounds agreed that local religious leaders, who enjoy respect in their local communities, should actively influence citizens to avoid radical interpretation of religion.
Representatives from the religious communities gave several examples of how local religious leaders have played a positive role in the prevention of religious radicalization in the country.
A representative of the Macedonian Orthodox Church (MOC) referred to a positive example when the religious community reached out to a well-known sports fan group from Skopje.
Although the meeting had not happened yet, the establishing of communication and willingness to discuss positive moral values between the church and this fan group, which is known for inciting violent incidents based on ethnic and religious intolerance, was largely supported by the roundtable discussants.
Discussants agreed that based on previous positive examples, religious communities should put efforts to cooperate with sports fan groups in order to promote positive moral values.
Discussing inter-religious dialogue on the local level, the representatives from both MOC and the Islamic Religious Community (IRC) agreed that although inter-religious community dialogue exists, it should be intensified, especially on the local level through joint actions.
The representatives of both religious communities shared examples of unfortunate events on the territory of Chair when local preachers were verbally attacked by believers of the other religion, as well as isolated incidents when places of worship were vandalized on the territory of Chair.
Lastly, a representative of the IRC shared a good practice that was implemented in his organization in the form of a system of internal quality control of the work of the imams and the administrative staff.
It was widely commented that other religious groups should also adopt this good practice in order to prevent misinterpretation of religious teaching.
The discussion of education focused in large part on the challenges emerging from the intertwining of religion and education.
Teachers, school support staff, as well as municipal representatives agreed that there are outlier cases of frontline school workers inciting radical behavior and extremist reasoning, and that such cases should be sanctioned immediately.
They agreed that civil society representatives, as well as local institutions, should work on advocating for the institutionalization of training and workshops for frontline school workers like those already introduced by the OSCE and CRPM.
Representatives of the religious communities further suggested that based on the positive experiences with the course on Ethics in Religion, educational institutions should consider introducing this course in 7th, 8th and 9th grade in elementary schools.
The discussion later shifted to the working conditions and the security of the frontline school workers.
All discussants agreed that the working conditions of frontline school workers should be immediately improved, while their security should be guaranteed continuously.
Some of the teachers discussed the negative effects of ethnic segregation in schools in Chair.
They suggested that integration measures should be applied, aiming towards multiethnic integration and trust-building under the auspices of the Ministry of Education and Science.
These activities should be sustainable and not dependent on time-limited internationally funded projects.
Furthermore, the frontline school workers suggested that frequent meetings between parents and teachers could further strengthen the role of both actors.
In their opinion, this exchange of ideas can prevent cases of radicalization leading to violent extremism.
Members of the school support staff, as well as municipal representatives, commented that school expert services should closely follow asocial students, students with difficulties to follow the course materials, and students coming from dysfunctional families.
These three groups of students can be more susceptible to radicalization and violent behavior.
Many stakeholders agreed that the parents’ councils should be empowered in order to continue playing the pivotal role of coordinating and informing parents about the development of their children.
This recommendation was clearly in line with the suggestion that parents and frontline school workers should communicate and exchange information more frequently.
Lastly, the frontline school workers noted that educational authorities should enter into a process of reforming curriculums in primary and secondary education in order to create more space for extracurricular activities.
The last topic discussed during the roundtable was the role of the social welfare and mental health institutions in the process of prevention of radicalization leading to violence.
One of the discussants, a psychiatrist by training, commented that family violence could encourage violent and extremist behavior of young individuals.
It was widely acknowledged that civil society should partner with state institutions such as the centers for social work in order to try and prevent such cases to the extent possible.
The roundtable was concluded with discussions from schools support staff representatives who noted that social work centers should take full advantage of their legal competencies and work closely with elementary and high schools in order to prevent radicalization leading to violent extremism.
There is a clear need for the creation of a statistical database of FTFs, which will be available to researchers and professionals for research purposes
Civil society should partner with local institutions and communities, as well as with international organizations in order to raise awareness about critical thinking, media literacy and promoting democratic culture
Civil society and international community representatives should engage more in communicating and collaborating with sports fan groups
Media have the responsibility to report carefully in a balanced and nonsensationalistic manner in order not to provoke violence, radicalization and extremism
Further efforts have to be invested in trust-building between local communities and law enforcement agencies. Long-term and sustainable solutions are needed
In the framework of the potential referral mechanism, the police should be engaged only as a last resort, mainly due to its repressive nature.
Furthermore, more attention needs to be paid to the creation of local prevention mechanisms
Local stakeholders should invest efforts to prevent stigmatizing certain ethnic, religious, or political groups as being linked to radicalization and violent extremism
The established LPC in Chair should intensify its activities and follow closely phenomena such as radicalization and violent extremism
The Municipality of Chair should invest in opening the youth center and make it a youth engagement hub
The Municipality of Chair should build on the positive experience of the Municipality of Tetovo in order to encourage youth volunteering and provide space and funding for young people to engage socially and be more creative
Political party youth organizations should be more engaged as P/CVERLT stakeholders on local level
Public and political officials should show enhanced sensitivity when using religious and ethnic symbols, taking into consideration the multiethnic character of Macedonian society
Every type of nationalist outburst should be publically denounced and sanctioned.
The international community could facilitate the creation of a monitoring body that will be particularly active during election campaigns
Local religious leaders enjoying respect in local communities should actively influence citizens to avoid radical interpretation of religion
Based on previous positive examples, religious communities should put efforts to cooperate with sports fan groups in order to promote positive moral values
Although intra-religious community dialogue exists, it should be intensified, especially on the local level through joint actions
The IRC has already introduced a system of internal quality control of the work of the imams and the administrative staff.
This good practice should be also adopted by other religious groups in order to prevent misinterpretation of religious teaching
Outlier cases of frontline school workers inciting radical behavior and extremist reasoning should be sanctioned.
Civil society should work on advocating for the institutionalization of training and workshops for frontline school workers
Based on the positive experiences with the course on Ethics in Religion, educational institutions should consider introducing this course in 7th, 8th and 9th grade in elementary schools
Working conditions of frontline school workers should be immediately improved
Taking into consideration the ethnic segregation in the elementary and high schools, integration measures should be applied, aiming towards multiethnic integration and trust-building under the auspices of the Ministry of Education and Science.
These activities should be sustainable, and non-dependent on time-limited internationally funded projects
More frequent meetings between parents and teachers can further strengthen the role of both actors
School services should closely follow asocial students, students with difficulties to follow the course materials, and students coming from dysfunctional families
The parents council should be further strengthened in order to continue playing the pivotal role of coordinating and informing the parents about the development of their children
Educational authorities should enter into a process of reforming curriculums in primary and secondary education in order to create more space for extracurricular activities
School expert services (psychologists, pedagogues, sociologists etc.) should be continuously engaged in work with more vulnerable students in order to prevent potential cases of radicalization leading to violent extremism
Family violence can encourage violent and extremist behavior of youth.
Civil society should partner with state institutions such as the centers for social work in order to try and prevent such cases to the extent possible
Social work centers should take full advantage of their legal competencies and work closely with the schools in order to prevent radicalization leading to violent extremism.
MUNICIPAL ROUNDTABLE IN GOSTIVAR (21 November 2018)
The phenomenon of radicalization is not well known in Gostivar and roundtable participants noted that it should be discussed more often, especially since radicalization is a complex issue that can be present in many forms.
The community representatives in Gostivar are aware that it is dangerous to categorize, generalize or link the phenomenon with one ethnic group or religion.
Participants also identified the following factors as pertinent to the occurrence and the spread of the phenomenon in their municipality
The political situation and ongoing polarization should not be overlooked, as they can potentially provoke adoption of a more radical behavior
The census being implemented without identification of the ethnic belonging of the citizens is seen as problematic, especially among the Roma community
Failing to recognize the problem as significant, disregarding the problem or failing to recognize its various forms may also have an effect on spreading the phenomenon in an unnoticed manner.
Strengthening of the civil society organizations, co-operation on a society level and exchange of good practices
The participants agreed that a debate is needed in order to identify problems and the causes of violence.
Only by knowing the roots of radicalization can preventive action be successfully planned and the phenomenon tackled.
The role of religion in prevention from radicalization that can lead to violent extremism is very special to representatives of religious communities and the rest of the community recognizes the need for them to be involved on two levels: (i) working with families and (ii) educating the youth and offering alternative interpretations to radical teaching.
The theologians should approach the families first because some of the problems arise mainly from family relations and the religious leaders have to work with them.
In terms of education, the imams continuously have an educational role and whenever a social problem occurs in mosques, they spend 10-15 minutes lecturing ethics and morality before the prayer.
To this end, the participants discussed the possibility for the imams to use the Friday lectures specifically to preach about radicalization and violent extremism as a phenomenon.
Expanding religious education in madrassas to women was recognized as important.
The role of mothers is paramount insofar as they can deconstruct radical interpretations of religion and/or embody values opposite to radical ideas through conversation with children.
In this way, women can act as powerful factors in prevention from radicalization.
However, the work of women‘s organizations shows that gender violence is a problem the Gostivar and that the violence generally originates from the family.
When it comes to violence, women are more interested in taking an active part in the prevention of it than are men.
Therefore, it was concluded that for the religious communities it is necessary to work with men to be more active in the prevention of violence in their families, as well as in the community.
Because the state administration alone cannot cope with violent extremism, a whole-of-community approach is needed.
This is operationalized through engaging different parts of the society in various institutional forms such as the Youth Council which is active in Gostivar but operates with limited finances.
Considering that the Council’s budget can cover for the implementation of 2-3 projects annually, its contribution to building resilient youth and preventing from violent extremism is assessed as insufficient.
On the other hand, the composition of the Youth Council has all the prerequisites to become an important actor for tackling factors that contribute to radicalization, as it has good representation of all ethnic groups, fosters multicultural understanding through its activities, promotes co-operation in combating ethnic polarization and improves inter-ethnic relations.
In Gostivar the local community takes pride in the fact that it nurtures a culture of respect for diversity resulting, among other things, in the ability of many to speak languages of other communities.
Violence is almost absent in Gostivar, but the participants identified the prevalence of political violence.
Hate speech is widespread and used both on an ethnic and religious basis, pointing to the need for raising awareness and building capacity for media literacy
Youth organizations are fundamental with their activities for building resilience, tolerance and development of a multicultural atmosphere among young people.
Youth organizations and CSOs that work with youth in Gostivar implement activities such as capacity building, non-formal education, financial education, familiarity with political management, leadership skills, and creative thinking.
They organize seminars, meetings and events and offer many activities that can keep young people in the municipality active and included, thus providing viable alternatives to the adoption of radical ideas and turning to violent extremism.
Due to the political situation in the council, the divisions and the problematic cohabitation between the majority in the council and the Mayor, the municipality fails to make important decisions that are relevant to building resilience and preventing radicalization.
Participants in the roundtable discussion noted the absence of consensus to employ more psychologists and pedagogues, stating that this is damaging the ability of schools to identify and effectively prevent radicalization.
While the municipal administration plans and proposes projects, the council decides in favor of a very small number of them and allocates few finances for their implementation.
In this difficult situation, the participants identified one institutional mechanism as relevant to the needs of the municipality for setting up a mechanism for building resilience and preventing of violent extremism.
This is the coordinating body for domestic violence that has been established on voluntary basis and functions without a budget of its own.
However, the responsibilities and the communication between the various institutions that have a role in the mechanism are defined with protocols.
A good practice for the preventive mechanism for violent extremism on the local level is to involve a number of institutions bound by a protocol of co-operation which decide on a common strategic plan and resources.
Participants further indicated that there is no need for institutionalization as the local-level mechanisms can function as ad-hoc groups, as long as they have a clear mission and scope of work, as well as expertise/knowledge related to prevention of violent extremism.
The Local Prevention Council (LPC) in Gostivar is not functional.
The participants complained that this institutional mechanism for prevention did not have any specified activities, pointing to a lack of professionalization and of a clear mission, as well as of protocols for co-operation on prevention of violent extremism, awareness-raising, training and communication.
The participants took the view that regardless of whether an existing body is tasked or a new body established for preventing violent extremism, the existing institutions should be included and their level of understanding of the phenomenon as well as co-operation among them increased.
Roundtable participants made note of some best practices that can be used for preventing violent extremism.
For example, on the local level in Gostivar there are cross-sectoral teams working with children, women and other victims of domestic violence.
In addition to being fully functional, these teams cooperate with schools, the police, social work centers and the health institutions.
In similar fashion, a protocol for cross-sectoral co-operation in prevention of radicalization that can lead to violent extremism needs to be designed.
Beyond communication on the local level among relevant institutions, a local mechanism for prevention of violent extremism needs to be connected with the centralized body that will coordinate, educate and act as a resource and support to the local teams.
The National Committee for Countering Violent Extremism and Counterterrorism can assume this function.
Setting up a community action team is planned in the Gostivar municipality with operational support from Search for Common Ground and financial support from the British Embassy.
This team will have 3 representatives from various institutions (the municipality, police, etc.), 3 representatives from the community (the non-governmental sector) and a representative of the religious communities, as well as 7 deputy members.
Tasks of the team will include preparation of a local action plan to implement the national strategy for countering violent extremism and monitoring the implementation of the local action plan.
Roundtable participants agreed on the central role of schools among locallevel institutions.
Considering that exclusion and marginalization are major factors along with the socioeconomic situation for a young person to accept radical ideas, and because the parent-student relationship is very underdeveloped, the participants in the roundtable discussion concluded that there is a need to work more intensively with teachers.
Participants also noted that the relationship between the parents and the teacher is suffering, as demonstrated by the absence of parents at parent meetings.
The teacherstudent relationships must advance in order for students to acquire learner behavior and to transfer skills and knowledge for resilience.
Also important for a local-level institutional mechanism are the representatives of the religious communities.
It is important for the religious teaching to offer counter-narratives to the radical narratives that spread and cause radical behavior, since there are groups and forums in Gostivar that are conducive to violent extremism with their interpretation of religion.
The participants noted that the goal of these groups is to cause distrust in the IRC.
On the other hand, the presence of these groups is democratically accepted by the IRC, even though it is perceived as a potential risk.
Taking into account the proliferation of books promoting extremism, religious representatives also have a role to play in reviewing the books published, as well as in preventing or stopping circulation of books that promote extremism.
To this end, the IRC should strengthen its peer review system.
A related need is the institutionalization and accreditation of religious education programs, particularly insofar as the IRC lacks awareness of religious teachings outside its own institutions.
Teachers, pedagogues and psychologists need tools and support so they can work with students in prevention of violent extremism in accordance with the national strategy.
There is a need to create opportunities for contact between students of different communities, considering that the education system, which is based on language of instruction, results in physical segregation – sometimes even in different school buildings.
In the absence of extracurricular activities in the schools, activities should be organized in which young people meet, identify common interests and socialize beyond ethnic barriers.
Because of the lack of services outside the school to fill their free time, youth spend time on the internet, in casinos, and in cafes, where they are exposed to all kinds of content, hate speech and values that can easily lead them to the adoption of violent behavior.
The biggest risk is that youth can lose the sense that they can contribute to this society, feeling excluded and marginalized.
These are considered important factors creating a conducive environment for violent extremism in the long run.
The participants concluded that the Ministry of Education should strengthen its support for the vocational schools, as through them the students acquire applicable skills.
The rationale of the participants was that students from vocational schools do not have time to devote themselves to deviant activities.
Additionally, roundtable participants took the view that graduates of vocational schools have skills that can be applied in the economy, allowing them to earn a living.
The Ministry of Education and Science should therefore rethink compulsory secondary education, introducing filters so that a transition is allowed to a secondary vocational school with an eye to reducing the trend of enrollment in a gymnasium/general high school.
Organize cultural events and sports activities to strengthen resilience, allow for contact and co-operation and decrease trends of exclusion and marginalization
Remove politics from education, equip schools with support staff, training and tools to prevent radicalization leading to violent extremism
Build the youth’s self-confidence so that they do not become violent, equip them with skills that will make them resilient to violent ideas, offer them services that will fill their free time with socially productive activities, and recognize their importance to society
Map community needs in Gostivar and develop a local action plan to implement the National Strategy for Countering Violent Extremism encompassing activities that are based on these needs
Taking into account the importance of local economic development, create jobs to minimize the radicalization factors and improve social well-being
Ensure that activities for prevention of radicalization and violent extremism are closely developed and implemented in co-operation with the Municipality of Gostivar, which is committed to the co-financing of their implementation.
Unlike other municipalities in North Macedonia, co-operation between the local government and non-governmental organizations prevails in Kumanovo.
After the 2001 armed conflict, relations between the communities were fragile and people were divided, but with the joint work of nongovernmental organizations and the municipality, this polarization has been managed effectively.
Even the Divo naselje case is widely perceived as a conflict of interest rather than terrorism. Knowledge of terrorism and violent extremism is partial and widely recognized in football fan groups, which encourage violence through their nationalist slogans.
At the same time, local authorities and CSOs in Kumanovo lack the experience of dealing with sports fan groups and do not know what kind of approach to pursue.
Participants in the discussion confirmed in varying degrees that the process of radicalization has begun in the municipality.
The main problem is that the youth is not recognized as an important factor in societal developments, even though they are at the highest risk of accepting radical ideologies that can lead to violent extremism.
In similar fashion, youth are not seen as a group that can play a significant role in radicalization activities, which can also lead to violent extremism.
Therefore, it is necessary to include non-formal educational activities and link them to the formal education, to facilitate a permanent offer of activities that will fill their time, and to enable selfrealization in order to make them feel as important community contributors.
Educational institutions cannot implement this approach alone.
Co-operation among local authorities, schools and non-governmental organizations is crucial.
The approach should consist of formal educational content, services (e.g., sports, youth clubs, thematic sections, competitions) as well as informal educational activities that will contribute to the strengthening of the community by building resilience among young people that will later result in the prevention of violent extremism.
The second factor discussed was the marginalization of certain groups on ethnic, socio-economic and religious basis.
Such marginalization creates conditions in which some individuals cannot fit in, facilitating radicalization among persons who are misunderstood in their environment and require support.
Otherwise stated, the conditions of the availability of radical ideologies or groups can inspire marginalized people to radicalize and this can lead to violent extremism.
Considering the fact that the mentality of the people in the municipality is to hide those who have been radicalized and to avoid speaking publicly about these problems (such as social exclusion), the same problems also foster other trends, such as emigration.
For example, the case of Divo naselje was never discussed, causing the non-Albanian population to emigrate from this part of the city.
The reasons were unknown and this led to additional segregation within the city.
The need for confidence building through public discussions about the various forms of extremism is evident since participants agree on the existence of extremist views that are hidden.
Since the 2001 armed conflict, there has been a process of building community resilience and cohesion in co-operation with non-governmental organizations.
Still, there remains a need of connectivity and collaboration, as well as the capacity to deal with the radicalization by building resilience to extremist ideologies.
The main focus should be placed on schools, through co-operation with professional trainers and CSOs specialized in these issues.
Since the issue is trending, and there is a great interest in it, more coordination with the donors is needed so that overlapping can be prevented.
In addition to schools, it is necessary to strengthen the capacities of non-governmental organizations for human rights education.
In order to maintain sustainability, parent capacity building is necessary.
The main source of hate comes from within the family and the adults are those who direct and conceive radical ideas in the youth.
Raising awareness is important because young people learn about extremist ideologies at an early age.
Parents should be educated and aware of the radicalization process so that they can guide their children.
One relevant good practice that has been developed in Kumanovo in dealing with radicalization is volunteering.
However, this is in decline, primarily due to economic reasons.
The essence of volunteer work is human association and respecting each other by offering opportunities for self-realization so that youth volunteers can feel like they belong to a society that cares for all.
The deployment of youth volunteers in local communities as active factors in the processes of prevention of radical extremism is not used enough.
High school students in particular could be more engaged in the existing CSOs.
Building trust between the community and the law enforcement agencies, the role of communities in prevention - Institutional mechanisms The participants in the discussion were of the opinion that there is hidden extremism in Kumanovo, and that the municipality should develop strategies on a local level for each institution to deal with radicalization that can lead to violence. Since the schools are a key tool against such radicalization, school-based strategies are needed, but also necessary are strategies at the level of other institutions (e.g., hospitals, theaters).
These strategies should describe relevant procedures and suggest how to behave when radicalization shows signs of moving toward violent extremism.
They should be developed together and aligned with the government‘s strategy in order to provide guidance.
These strategies should have a holistic approach and should be interconnected with other policies.
For example, one of the factors that cause radicalization is marginalization, and one of the reasons behind marginalization is chronic unemployment.
The policies and the strategies for dealing with violent extremism need to address the causes created by the factors of radicalization and should be developed and implemented to meet needs on a local level.
For example, the employment plan), which measures the number of unemployed people with secondary education, should include employment methods for people with primary or incomplete primary/secondary education, because these people can be easily manipulated and indoctrinated into radical ideologies that can lead to violent extremism.
In dealing with this phenomenon, skills for preventing hate speech are instrumental, as are skills for dealing with post-traumatic stress, non-violent communication, and conflict management.
There are several organizations in Kumanovo working on these issues for years, such as CSO Trust, the Center for Intercultural Dialogue, KHAM and the Women’s Association of Kumanovo.
It was concluded that the media, religious communities and police can play an important role in preventing radicalization.
The media do not have adequate knowledge of the phenomenon and fail to inform about and prevent violent extremism.
On the other hand, religious communities fail to raise awareness of the value of mutual respect.
They are not active in creating counter-narratives of the radical interpretations of religion with the exception of the Islamic Youth Forum.
There is no co-operation amongst religious communities, despite the fact that mobilization is important for prevention.
They do not recognize their role in hindering the phenomenon and do not direct their power towards this process.
The introduction of extracurricular activities to encourage inter-ethnic and religious co-operation in secondary schools should be considered an opportunity.
The role of the police is reflected in their work with the families in halting radicalization.
In order to achieve this effectively, the community must not stigmatize those who cooperate with the police.
The Prevention Department should strengthen their communication with the students in order to improve the trust between them.
A good practice of confidence-building is the work of the police on traffic safety.
This model should be replicated for the prevention of radicalization and violent extremism.
On a local level, there are already several models of institutional cross-sectoral co-operation on various issues, such as the Local Prevention Council (LPC), a local body for preventing social risks.
The UNICEF School Violence Program and the OSCE Safe Schools Project have also been identified as significant in tackling violence.
It is necessary to appoint professional and motivated representatives in LPC so that they can effectively contribute in the managing of violent extremism.
It is also very important that the rule of law and justice should apply to all equally and not selectively.
The municipality has neither an action plan to implement the national strategy for the prevention of violent extremism, nor a reintegration program for the people who took part in ISIS as foreign fighters, and only one-time financial assistance is available.
The new law on social protection should enable integrated casework that can be a response to the needs.
According to the participants in the discussion, the prevention and reintegration measures depend on the local neighborhood units, since they can be the best at responding to people‘s needs.
With the new law on local self-government, however, these units do not have legal subjectivity, such that amendments to the law are needed.
The biggest challenge identified in the education system by the participants is the language segregation that encourages polarization in the municipality.
Current segregation could be addressed via the construction of new schools where children would study together, but for now this solution is expensive and impossible to apply.
At the same time, it was emphasized that the advocacy and activism of the non-governmental organizations successfully prevented an additional marginalization by ending the segregation of Roma children in Kumanovo schools.
The local municipal institutions are advised to promote the status of Roma children by fostering understanding between the larger ethnic communities and Roma community.
In addition, given the vulnerable economic situation of most of the Roma families, expenses for education are a major burden on family budgets, such that local officials should find appropriate funds, if possible.
The solutions to segregation introduced to date are not systemic, with integration generally not pursued as a civic value and mainly supported by the projects funded by international organizations for managing conflict situations.
By way of contrast, systemic solutions for the implementation of joint teaching will lead to familiarization and exchange with the “other”.
Building on good practices on the national level by OSCE, the local officials should support CSOs from the region in implementation of confidencebuilding projects.
Moreover, introducing topics and pedagogical methods in the teaching process will further develop critical thinking, tolerance and cooperation.
The participants in the discussion concluded that the format developed by the OSCE through the Safe Schools Project for co-operation at school level and between the schools and the municipality is relevant for establishing a model for prevention of radicalization through the involvement of several entities.
This being the case, the experience of the mediation club should be used and exchanged with the other schools.
Special emphasis should be placed on building capacity and awareness of the phenomenon of radicalization that can lead to violent extremism among teachers in order to shape their statements, behaviors and the messages they send.
The pedagogical and psychological services need to be strengthened in the monitoring of the teachers to check whether they show signs of radicalization and whether they can respond to radical behavior with appropriate support.
Building such capacities was not perceived as a difficult task, especially since the teachers have already undergone training linked on the phenomenon and can use the newly acquired new skills in preventing violent extremism.
The teachers should develop measures, methods and activities for inclusion in their annual work programs, while the municipalities should monitor the implementation of relevant measures.
It is important to use the extracurricular content in education to prevent radicalization.
It is noted in the teacher’s job descriptions that they should conduct after-school activities, clubs, thematic sections, competitions, and other activities beyond standard classroom instruction.
However, it is necessary to stimulate teachers to implement these, with roundtable participants proposing inclusion of these activities in teachers’ performance evaluations.
Additionally, municipalities have a role to help schools organize free activities by linking them with non-governmental organizations.
The already excellent co-operation between the professional service and nongovernmental organizations is a very good basis for this.
Such co-operation should be directed towards activities through which values such as sympathy, co-operation, mutual respect and empathy will be cultivated.
The schools are in need of guidance on how to behave in the event of radicalization and must be connected to a broader system for prevention.
Working with the parents is crucial, but there is a trend for parents not to come to parent’s meetings, resulting in less co-operation.
Struga is one of the municipalities in North Macedonia that is considered as the cradle of religious and inter-ethnic cohesion.
However, sporadic outbursts of religious and nationalist radicalization and violence are present on the territory of the municipality.
These phenomena were most visible around the armed conflict in 2001 and its immediate aftermath, but also shortly before and after the new territorial division of municipalities in 2004.
The main driver of these sporadic tensions is organized crime, mostly manifested through unsolved murders of more visible citizens with serious criminal records, drug trafficking, human trafficking, smuggling, extortion and land concessions.
All these issues have seriously shaken citizens’ trust in central and local institutions, especially trust in law enforcement and judicial institutions.
There was a clear consensus among the present discussants that a lot has to be done in order to make Struga a safe space resilient to radicalization leading to violent extremism.
Lack of infrastructure was also pointed out as one of the main problems to be addressed in order to make Struga a strong city.
In general, the discussion during the roundtable was not very vivid and lively, and there was a sense of fear among the participants to speak openly about some of the issues, mainly due to the presence of high officials from the local self-government.
The representatives of civil society, who wanted to stress the role of local and national media, opened the discussion.
It was widely accepted that taking into consideration the specifics of the municipality of Struga and the past events (mainly referring to the inter-ethnic incidents following the conflict in 2001 and the territorial municipal division in 2004), the media have a responsibility to report carefully, in a balanced and non-sensational manner, in order not to incite manifestations of violent behavior, radicalism or extremist views.
The discussion later shifted to questions regarding trust building between local communities and law enforcement, especially in terms of developing institutional prevention mechanisms.
In order to disseminate its contents and to facilitate the implementation of the National Strategy for Countering Violent Extremism, constant and constructive communication between the Committee on the central level, and the local government should be carried out.
This was highlighted by representatives of the penitentiary institution in Struga, as well as by representatives of the NCCVECT.
The same interlocutors also agreed that the rule of law is the key pillar for implementation of any national strategy on local level.
Therefore, this pointed to the necessity of a systematic approach in strengthening the institutions, respecting the laws and preventing selectivity in the process.
Only a “whole-of-society-approach” can result in long-term success.
Representatives of civil society, as well as social welfare representatives, stressed that additional police activities are necessary in order to suppress criminal activities, which serve as a bad example for the youth.
Criminal activities on the local level contribute to the process of radicalization leading to violent extremism.
These stakeholders insisted on highlighting a series of unsolved murders on the local level.
The felonies under discussion are closely related to organized crime: drug dealing, prostitution, human trafficking and local land concessions.
These phenomena had resulted in a shattered trust of the citizens in local and central institutions.
This refers primarily to the police who enjoy a record low trust among the local citizens in Struga.
It was reaffirmed several times that restoring citizens’ faith in local and central institutions will be the crucial pillar on which prevention of radicalization leading to violent extremism should be built.
In a similar vein, several discussants also circled the discussion with a conclusion that transparency and accountability of the local self-government need to be improved in order to regain the trust of its citizens.
The roundtable discussion continued with topics related to the competencies of the local self-government, the context in which local communities operate, as well as the role of other relevant local stakeholders.
Local civil society representatives agreed that additional efforts should be made to prevent the labeling and stigmatization of specific individuals/religious/political groups and presenting them as pivotal reason for the existence of radicalization leading to violent extremism.
A more cohesive societal approach is needed.
Social workers, frontline school workers and local religious leaders emphasized the importance of the family in the process of creating moral and ethical values among young people.
They called for deeper engagement of all local stakeholders in order to preserve and develop family values.
The representatives of the local self-government highlighted that it is necessary to investigate and highlight the disadvantages of the decentralization process, which could be an obstacle to an effective implementation of efforts in preventing radicalization leading to violent extremism.
On the other hand, it was noted that the right-wing extremism propelled by the “black blocks” of sports fan is not present in Struga, and local authorities should continue to invest efforts to preserve this stability.
Frontline school workers and social welfare representatives also highlighted that sports activities are of crucial importance in the aspiration to prevent violent extremism.
Municipal investments in sports infrastructure are the best tool to create fertile ground for more sports activities in which local youth will be engaged.
Therefore, it is necessary to allocate more funds for a sports hall, a swimming pool and other similar sports venues.
The next topic in the discussion was the important role of local religious leaders.
A straightforward consensus was reached that religious communities in the municipality must actively engage in the prevention process by promoting positive values in accordance with the established religious teaching.
The representatives of the largest two religious communities jointly underpinned that it is of utmost importance and necessity to rebuild the positive example from the past, when the Macedonian Orthodox Church (MOC) and the Islamic Religious Community (IRC) had been actively involved in the roles of mediators among the local population through promoting values in the spirit of cohesion.
They commented on the examples from several years ago when a potential religious conflict in the village of Oktisi was prevented through a joint intervention by the local religious leaders.
Furthermore, several stakeholders embraced and supported the efforts of the IRC, which constantly communicates with its membership in order to prevent violent extremism and radicalization.
Also presented in a positive light was the consistency with which the IRC distances itself from individuals and groups preaching outside of the institutions and the mosques, noting that the IRC cannot be aware if such individuals or groups promote violent extremism.
At the same time, concerns were raised about the Ministry of Interior’s lack of activity and investigation following reports for radical behavior submitted by the IRC.
Both religious leaders and other interlocutors involved in the discussion commented that better co-operation between the police and the religious communities is needed.
Lastly, the discussion shifted from the role of the religious community to the role of education in preventing radicalization and violent extremism, being bridged through discussing the effects of studying religious concepts in school curricula.
The local religious leaders were vocal in highlighting that History of Religions and Ethics in Religions courses are of exceptional importance in the early guidance and building a climate of coexistence, as well as understanding among young generations.
That is why these courses should be taught by theologians, who have the needed experience and knowledge to correctly transfer the moral teaching of religions.
Frontline school workers commented that primary education institutions are not engaged enough in promoting inclusive and multicultural environments for their students.
They raised their concerns that this creates a spillover effect resulting with a tense atmosphere in high schools later on in the course of education of youth.
It was consensually agreed that the role of education is crucial in the process of prevention of radicalization leading to violent extremism.
An important precondition is securing a constant increase of the level of knowledge among both students and teachers.
Reforms of the teaching curricula, as well as the reorganization of extracurricular activities, were mentioned by civil society representatives as some of the ways to achieve these goals.
Lastly, the positive example of Iceland was highlighted for the combined patrols comprised of parents and police officers for monitoring the behavior of adolescents.
Furthermore, it was stressed that the announced reintroduction of the “local neighborhood police officers” will play an important role in building a peaceful and cohesive local community.
Taking into consideration the specifics of the municipality of Struga and the past events, the media have the responsibility to report carefully, and in a balanced and non-sensational manner in order not to incite manifestations of violent behavior, radicalism or extremist views.
Implementation of the National Strategy for Countering Violent Extremism should be carried out through constant and constructive communication between the Committee on the central level, and the local government.
The rule of law is the key pillar for the implementation of any national strategy on the local level.
This points to the necessity of a systematic approach in strengthening the institutions and promoting consistent implementation of legislation.
Additional police activities are necessary in order to suppress criminal activities, which serve as a bad example for the youth.
Criminal activities on the local level contribute to the process of radicalization leading to violent extremism.
The trust of citizens in the institutions is shattered.
This refers primarily to the police who enjoy a record low trust among the local citizens in Struga.
The transparency and accountability of the local self-government needs to be improved in order to regain the trust of its citizens.
Additional efforts should be made to prevent the labeling and stigmatization of specific individuals/religious/political groups and presenting them as a pivotal reason for the existence of radicalization leading to violent extremism.
Taking into account the importance of the family in the process of creating moral and ethical values among young people, deeper engagement of all local stakeholders is needed.
It is necessary to investigate and highlight the disadvantages of the decentralization process, which could be an obstacle to effective implementation of efforts in preventing radicalization leading to violent extremism.
The deviant phenomenon of right-wing extremism propelled by the “black blocks” of sports fan groups is not present in Struga.
Sports activities are of crucial importance in the aspiration to prevent violent extremism.
Municipal investments in sports infrastructure are the best tool to create fertile ground for more sports activities in which local youth will be engaged.
Therefore, it is necessary to allocate more funds for a sports hall, a swimming pool and other similar sports venues.
The religious communities in the municipality must actively engage in the prevention process by promoting positive values in accordance with the established religious teaching.
It is of utmost importance and necessity to rebuild the positive example from the past when the Macedonian Orthodox Church (MOC) and IRC had been actively involved in the roles of mediators among the local population through promoting values in the spirit of cohesion.
The stakeholders embraced and supported the efforts of the Islamic Religious Community (IRC), which constantly communicates with its membership to prevent violent extremism and radicalization.
At the same time, concerns were raised about the Ministry of Interior’s lack of activity and investigation following reports for radical behavior submitted by the IRC.
The History of Religions and Ethics in Religions courses are of exceptional importance in the early guidance and building a climate of coexistence, as well as understanding among young generations.
That is why these courses should be taught by theologians, who have the needed experience and knowledge to correctly transfer the moral teaching of religions.
Primary education institutions are not engaged enough in promoting inclusive and multicultural environments for their students.
Furthermore, this creates a spillover effect resulting in tense atmosphere in high schools.
The role of education is crucial in the process of prevention of radicalization leading to violent extremism.
An important precondition is securing a constant increase of the level of knowledge among both students and teachers.
The positive example of Iceland was highlighted for the combined patrols comprised of parents and police officers.
Furthermore, it was stressed that the announced reintroduction of the “local neighborhood police officers” will play an important role in building a peaceful and cohesive local community.
According to workshop participants, the lack of success in managing interethnic conflicts in Tetovo has increased the risk of violent extremism, such that the adoption of the measures for countering violent extremism in Tetovo comes late.
Additionally, community relations are assessed as fragile.
The main factors identified in the discussion as influencing an environment in which radical ideas can be adopted and can lead to violent extremism are
Religious intolerance for people belonging to another religion.
The discussion exposed a need for the people in Tetovo to love and treasure their own religion, but also to learn how to respect the religious freedoms and religious choices of others.
Segregation in schools.
This situation contributes to the divisions between the communities and the lack of contact deprives us of the opportunity to meet and get to know the other.
The practice of inter-community dialogue is missing, except when it is encouraged by foreign-funded projects.
Inner-community divisions.
Example of this recurrent trend discussed in the workshop were the divisions in the prisons between groups that practice Islam or similarly between fan clubs of local football teams.
The Local Prevention Council (LPC) in Tetovo was assessed to be non-functional, mainly due to the fact that the involved institutions are afraid to engage as they will overlap LPC council and the establishment of protocols for communication would be helpful to increase functionality, whereas the effectiveness will depend on the continuity and turnover of the council members with the change of government.
To this end, it is important for the municipality to take over coordination of LPC for the purpose of countering and preventing violent extremism or to replace the LPC with a local council for countering violent extremism which will constitute a decentralized body of the national council.
Workshop participants also discussed other possible mechanisms that can be useful for preventing and countering violent extremism.
For example, the youth council that has not been operationalized yet and the local council for prevention of juvenile delinquency that is being formed now.
For the purpose of prevention and building resilient youth in pre-school and primary education, the participants proposed forming at least two teams comprised of psychologists, sociologists and pedagogues, who would implement a training program using games, roleplays, and increasing skills for dialogue and cooperation.
The practice of the municipality to finance multicultural youth activities needs to be continued and increased support should be provided.
To this end, the civil society organizations that work with youth need to approach the municipality and initiate activities that will develop inter-community cooperation and dialogue.
The municipality should consider financing extracurricular activities of the schools that facilitate inter-community interaction (such as debates, competitions, sports activities) as well as activities that stimulate the acquisition of skills such as critical thinking and conflict resolution, as well as a culture of dialogue.
The most important conclusion from the discussion was that the institutions should not transfer the responsibilities for prevention and countering violent extremism from one to another.
The whole of society approach should be applied where responsibilities need to be shared among all stakeholders in the community.
Civil society and media have a pivotal role in managing hate speech, conflicts, and hostility, as well as in preventing adoption of radical ideas that might lead to violent extremism.
To this end, one should consider working with the media and/or financing activities that will result in production of materials and content that will inform citizens about radicalization.
Training is also needed so that the media do not become factors for instigating violent extremism.
Civil society organizations are dependent on the finances of international organizations, as the municipality does not provide enough funding for their activities.
More importantly, because funding for P/CVERLT work is not widely available as of yet, the Government on central level and through the local self-government units needs to secure funding for prevention from radicalization.
Working with the football clubs and their fan clubs should be considered a priority.
To this end, one should use the authority of the club managers to prevent use of hate speech towards other ethnic groups, taking into account that because the teams are ethnically mixed, cheering on ethnic basis may affect the team members’ performance.
These efforts can lead towards prevention of polarization and segregation of communities.
For the purpose of prevention from radicalization, the workshop participants noted that it is crucial for the municipality to activate the neighborhood communities.
Through them, the community can be engaged in early prevention from radicalization.
However, the neighborhood communities need to be supported by recommended approaches and a methodology in order to mobilize the community.
In partnership with civil society, institutions and international organizations, neighborhood communities need to engage actively in raising awareness for critical thinking, media literacy and an overall promotion of democratic culture.
Education has a central role in the system of prevention of violent extremism, providing skills for resilience and thus serving as an instrument for prevention of radicalization.
In Tetovo, some activities already implemented in schools are relevant and compatible with prevention from radicalization that can lead to violent extremism.
These are the OSCE Safe Schools Project; the Nansen Interethnic Cooperation Project, the OSCE Building Bridges Project and the new project that will enable the co-operation with parents.
Such activities should be interlinked so that the teachers are aware that the skills acquired through different projects are relevant and useful for prevention of radicalization.
Radicalization is prevented by applying tools against discrimination and exclusion of youth, considering that youth are most at risk to adopt radical ideas.
Therefore, the municipality plans to include youth in decision making in the schools and at community level, with an eye to making youth feel included in the society.
To this end, training is being organized for decision-making in schools, students elect their representatives in the student associations and their initiatives are being implemented (such as leisure activities, organization of sports events, etc.).
The Youth Council of the municipality is still not operational, but once it is activated youth should be included in important decision making at the municipal level.
The municipality needs to put additional efforts to ensure representatives in the school student bodies and in the municipal youth council, as well as disseminate the decisions to the youth they are representing.
For this target group- the youth- the participants in the round table thought that the Internet still remains a challenge.
The schools have been blocking online pages but are lacking an online security program or e-safety policy that will advise how children should critically assess internet-based content and build resistance.
Additionally, raising awareness among and working together with parents to monitor their children’s online activity have not yet started in Tetovo.
Overall, participants concluded that there is a paramount need to work with families in improving their children’s critical thinking.
In principle, critical thinking is developed in a classroom through the education content using different pedagogical methods.
In addition, the participants identified extra-curricular activities as an entry point for more critical thinking activities to be applied.
However, due to being overburdened by the curricular activities, almost none of the schools realize extracurricular activities.
Possibilities for the municipality to stimulate realization of extra-curricular activities should be explored.
Possible options for this include providing funding for activities and overall reform of the system that encompasses extra-curricular activities.
Finally, the participants discussed the role that pedagogical and psychological services have on school children.
This expert service is seen as an important link in the prevention system from radicalization, as they can work on a daily basis with the students at high risk of acquiring radical ideas by regularly talking to them individually or working through group therapy programs.
It is essential that the front-line workers continuously work with asocial students, those that have been problematic during classes and those coming from dysfunctional families.
Setting up a system that will monitor and report on their progress regularly is a prerequisite for the new prevention system on the municipal level.
While it was recognized that their role is very important during the school hours, the participants also noted that the overall impact of the pedagogical and psychological services in schools is limited because of lack of such support services after classes.
This is especially the case in Tetovo because therapeutic communities and other types of psycho–social support groups are lacking in the municipality.
The municipality needs to determine the source of inter-ethnic hatred and the incitement to violence and to plan and implement activities that prevent spread of inter-ethnic hatred and incitement to violence.
Local prevention councils are a legal obligation and Tetovo municipality needs to revive them, but, there are no finances available for activating the LPC.
Overcoming problems with overlapping responsibilities and funding should be resolved in co-operation with the central Government.
In view of the already existing segregation, encouraging socialization, co-operation and exchange without ethnic barriers starting from kindergartens through primary and secondary schools should be the number one priority of the municipality, in order to enable contact with the ‘others’ in the community.
Continuous monitoring and mapping of risky behavior in schools must be established, with awareness raising and training of teachers, psychologists and pedagogues on how to notice and prevent radicalization a prerequisite for this.
The municipality needs a system to respond to violent extremism.
To make the response more effective, this system should consist of a coordinating body with representatives of all institutions at local level, as well as a communication model between such institutions.
Religious leaders have a leading role in promoting integration, cooperation and nonviolence in Tetovo.
Therefore, they need to be actively involved in prevention of radicalization that can lead to violent extremism.
SURVEY ON DECENTRALIZATION 2008
Public Administration Reform Department
Spillover Monitor Mission to Skopje
November 2008
Acknowledgements
This survey is the result of field research conducted by the Public Administration Re-form Department of the OSCE Spillover Monitor Mission to Skopje.
Special thanks go to those municipal administrations in the country that provided a valuable con-tribution and invested their time in completing the survey as well as the experts who helped drafting the questionnaires.
Brima Gallup – Skopje had an essential role in de-fining the methodology for processing and analyzing the data, and in conducting an opinion poll the findings of which are a real added value to this survey.
Finally, the Pub-lic Administration Reform Department expresses its gratitude to all of their colleagues in the Mission who contributed to the publishing of this survey.
This report on the findings of the Survey on the Implementation of the Process of Decentralization, November 2008 was prepared by the Public Administration Reform Department (PARD) in the Organization of the Security and Cooperation in Europe – Spillover Monitor Mission to Skopje:
Mr. Alessandro Tedesco, Acting Head of PAR Department
Ms. Maja Subotic, National Public Administration Reform Officer
Mr. Aqim Emurli, National Public Administration Reform Officer
Mr. Zage Filipovski, National Public Administration Reform Officer
Mr. Lirim Dalipi, National Public Administration Reform Officer
Mr. Aleksandar Shumkovski, National Public Administration Reform Officer
Ms. Kristina Jovanova, Project Assistant
Introduction
The 2008 survey on decentralization builds on the findings outlined in the 2006 and 2007 editions.
The Public Administration Reform Department (PARD) of the OSCE Spill-over Monitor Mission to Skopje acquired significant experience in analyzing develop-ments related to decentralization, and this survey represents a valid contribution for stakeholders interested in particular aspects of the process.
The survey was conducted between July and November 2008, and it grounds its find-ings on field research conducted by the OSCE SMMS PARD officers in all units of local self-government across the country.
A set of 99 questions drafted by the OSCE was de-livered to relevant municipal departments; answers were collected and processed in a database containing input from over 84 per cent of municipalities.
The data received from the local self-government units are complemented by the outcome of a tele-phone poll commissioned from Brima Gallup – Skopje and implemented with sample of 1,408 persons during October 2008.
The 2008 opinion poll component differs from last year’s research, as the number of questions increased significantly (nearly match-ing the size of the questionnaire posed to municipal administrations).
Moreover, the sample was structured in a stratified way, i.e. selecting targets with a direct interest in the municipal service at stake (e.g. teachers, pupils and their parents for the part on education, local businessmen for the text about local economic development, etc.).
The composition of the sample is outlined in each chapter.
Local governance entails a variety of different issues.
This study focuses on seven areas of interest which the OSCE considers among the most relevant to the ongoing de-centralization process.
Five of them (urban planning, communal services, education, municipal finance and local economic development) have also been a matter of as-sessment in previous editions of the survey, while the chapter on culture is one of the novelties of this year’s survey.
As was the case for the 2006 and 2007 surveys, the methodology employed in this study is designed to provide information on the internal assessment of the situation by the municipal leadership and administration and also to test to what extent they understand the general overview of the facts and features of the current reforms.
Such findings are compared with citizens’ views on municipal performances, in an attempt to test the perception of decentralization - and local governance in general - of the final users of municipal services.
Most of the results in the report are not focused on accurate statistical data of individual cases, but concentrate instead on revealing the general trends in the decentralization process.
1. Culture
1.1 Background and legal framework
Culture is a segment not included in the two previous OSCE SMMS surveys, and there-fore this chapter will focus on a few issues regarding decentralization in the field of culture such as the transfer of assets, personnel, equipment, staff, and funds as well as the relations between municipalities and the Ministry of Culture.
This chapter will also include an overview on culture at the local level, from developments in the legal framework1 to the main achievements at the field level, and the involvement of the members of ethnicities throughout the country in the cultural institutions and activi-ties through the Commissions for Inter-Community Relations (CICR).
Preserving cultural heritage, celebration of different events and remembrance of per-sons of importance for the culture and history of the municipality are aspects that this chapter will explore, as well as equal opportunities for expression, cultivation and af-firmation of cultural identities of the communities.
1.2 Findings on Culture
The results of the findings show that the organization of cultural events is mainly con-ducted in the municipalities already equipped with cultural centres, mainly located in the urban municipalities.
The central government, that is to say the Ministry of Culture, continues to control the cultural assets, cultural centres and the staff in 64.3 per cent of the municipalities.
Only 35.7 per cent of those municipalities that have cultural cen-tres replied that the Ministry had transferred this competency, assets and staff to the municipalities.
When those municipalities were asked why the Ministry of Culture had not given these assets to be managed by them, the majority of them, 66.7 per cent, replied that this was a decision to be taken by the central government without stating the reason why.
Cultural policies at the local level in 2008 were compared with the activities in 2007.
The chart below shows that almost half of the municipal councils in the country did not adopt an annual plan for culture in 2007.
Out of those that adopted an annual plan for culture, each municipality on average implemented only around 15 per cent of the plan.
The chart highlights a slight increase in interest for culture in 2008.
Moreover, 44 per cent of the interviewed municipalities replied that they have allocated funds in their budgets for cultural activities, ranging from folk festivals and art exhibitions to printing promotional materials and marking historical events and personalities.
When asked about the manner in which the funds were disbursed, 18 per cent replied through ten-dering procedures, 29 per cent through direct contract with cultural associations and NGOs, 50 per cent of the municipalities implemented their activities themselves and only 3 per cent entered into Public Private Partnership to implement cultural activities and events.
Local culture provides a sense of identity for rural communities and residents.
This identity facilitates common understandings, traditions and values, all central to the identification of plans of action to improve well-being.
Despite the fact that 62 per cent of the municipalities replied that they had appointed a person in charge of culture, local culture is rarely seen as playing a significant role in the development outcomes.
Instead, culture is often viewed as an outgrowth of a par-ticular region and dependent upon financial assistance by the central government.
This chapter also aims to give an insight into the ethnic diversity in the country in ref-erence to the cultural activities and to see to what extent this competency has been implemented by the local authorities.
The municipalities with at least 20 per cent of the population not belonging to the main ethnic group present in their territory were assessed on their ability to implement cultural activities reflecting their multi-ethnic background, and to see if cultural initiatives in multi-ethnic municipalities are reviewed by the Commission for Inter-Community Relations to ensure participation of all communities in the cultural life.
In the 22 municipalities, which established these commissions, the cultural initiatives initiated by the respective municipal councils were reviewed by CICR only in 28 per cent of the cases.
1.3 Opinion poll on culture
This survey is supplemented by an opinion poll conducted throughout the country in order to see what the citizens thought about the issue of culture and what they would like their municipalities to do more about the same matter.
It is noteworthy to verify whether the public opinion reckons that decentralization had made a difference in this field and, to this respect, 55 per cent of the interviewees expressed satisfaction with the cultural activities in their respective municipalities since the start of the decentral-ization, as opposed to the 45 per cent who had a negative opinion.
The margin was much higher when the citizens were asked if there were more cultural events then than before, 52.8 per cent thought that the decentralization had brought more cultural events than they used to have as opposed to 23.7 per cent who thought that before decentralization culture had been more present in their municipalities.
Answers to the question of what more they would like from their municipalities in terms of culture were heterogeneous.
Engagement of young people in culture and increased number of cultural events prevailed with over 40 per cent each.
This was followed by construction of cultural and sports facilities with 18 per cent of the inter-viewed citizens.
1.4 Conclusions and recommendations
Culture is a competency which is still considered centralized despite the legal provisions deriving from the Law on Culture4 providing grounds for the munici-palities to found cultural institutions and to organize different cultural activities.
Based on the results of the survey, culture is not ranking high in the priorities of the local government units.
There are still cultural assets to be decentralized throughout the country.
Their allocation to municipalities could sensibly foster cultural development.
Culture should be regarded as an integral part of local development.
Just like at the national level, culture is linked to job creation and revenues at the local level too.
Whether in cities or rural areas, culture has become an essential component in the quality of life, and should therefore not be disregarded by stakeholders involved in decentralization.
Local culture presents unique options for locally based economic and other de-velopment.
It is crucial for community development practitioners to consider the importance of culture in the efforts to improve local livelihood.
By paying attention to cultural values, traditions and related factors, more efficient and ef-fective development efforts can be achieved.
Local culture can serve as a basis for development.
Such efforts can serve to promote the local identity, languages and minority cultures.
Efforts can focus on the preservation or promotion of a culture, but can also use culture to mobilize the local population.
Examples of cultural preservation or efforts focusing on culture are often seen in relation to tourism.
These include renovation of villages (architectural rehabilitation, etc.), highlighting the architectural heritage of an area (restoring historic sites to serve as a focal point for tourists), cultural venues (local heritage centres, traditional cultural events), traditional craft and artistic skills (development of industry and employment based on the production of items that are symbolic of the local culture), and culture based entertainment and cultural dissemination (organization of cultural activities, festivals, perma-nent exhibitions).
Providing a local linkage and cultural basis for development is important.
De-velopment efforts that focus on culture provide a mechanism for linking local residents to the development process.
Through such efforts, local residents can encourage development that preserves or promotes their culture.
This is partic-ularly important in the development efforts that seek to elicit local participation, volunteerism, and community action.
These efforts serve as a basis for development, but also serve to maintain cul-tural traditions and ways of life.
Furthermore, such forms of development high-light the importance of rural cultures and identify their role in shaping the wider society.
Finally, through such development, community and cultural identities are reinforced and collective identities are strengthened.
Such interaction can lead to an improved state of community and social well-being.
2. Education
2.1. Introduction
The process of decentralization in education brought a clearer distinction of roles, rights and responsibilities of the authorities at the central and local level.
It enabled higher participation of local communities in decision-making processes, more active and transparent management of schools through greater involvement of stakehold-ers, and more efficient control over the work and activities in schools and the quality of teaching.
Finally, it enables the municipalities to manage the financial assets allocated for education.
This chapter covers several issues related to local governance and education such as decision-making mechanisms at the school level, the relations and cooperation be-tween schools, municipalities and state bodies, the level of access to information and communication by all stakeholders, the degree of involvement of teachers and parents in school management, the relations between school directors and school boards.
All topics will be tackled from two perspectives as views from municipalities will be com-pared with citizens’ expectations.
2.2. Legal Framework
Article 22 of the Law on Local Self-Government clearly lists municipal competences in the field of education.
Primary and secondary education are also regulated by the Law on Primary Education and its amendments, the Law on Secondary Education and its amendments, the Law on the State Education Inspectorate, and the Law on Financ-ing of the Local Self-Government Units and the Law on the Bureau for Development of Education.
Both primary and secondary education became municipal competences as of 1 July 2005.
The transfer implies municipal ownership of school buildings and other property related to elementary and secondary education, as well as the responsibility for the maintenance of such objects, recruitment of education staff, selection and dismissal of the directors of the schools, the payment of salaries for auxiliary staff together with transport logistics and accommodation for students in dormitories.
Decentralized education entails the participation and the coordination of many stakeholders such as the Local Self-Government Units (LSGU), school directors, parents and students at the local level, and the Ministry of Education (MoE) and its branches at the national level as prescribed by the above mentioned legislation.
Primary and secondary education competences (including its financing) were trans-ferred in July 2007 to the local level in all municipalities that entered the second phase of decentralization, in accordance with the Law on Financing the Local Self-Governments Units.
This means allocation of block grants covering teachers’ salaries and funds for school maintenance.
Block grants cannot be lower than the equivalent funds allocated in the State Budget during the first phase of decentralization.
Munici-palities that have not yet entered the second phase of decentralization continue to use the temporary formula for funding, i.e. teachers’ salaries in primary and secondary education, expenses for the maintenance of school buildings and for the transport of pupils are afforded by central authorities as previously.
2.3. State of Affairs
Education still stands as a crucial matter three years after the beginning of the decen-tralization process.
Municipalities in general pay attention to this competency and try to consolidate it in a way to make it better managed at the local level and to provide better services in the field of education, though results differ significantly among LS-GUs.
Citizens perceive decentralized education as a process able to ensure account-ability, transparency, quality, equity and efficiency.
Many stakeholders (education officials, mayors, school board members, directors, par-ents, teachers, students and others) still show little understanding of their rights, roles and responsibilities in the process.
There is a shared feeling that members of school boards, parents’ councils, parents, teachers and citizens in general have been margin-alized by municipal management, whereas the same applies for what the LSGUs feel about their treatment by the central government (MoE).
Lack of access to informa-tion and communication among stakeholders has also been observed throughout the implementation of the decentralization process (Ananiev, 2008).
Other changes occurred in primary and secondary education15; compulsory atten-dance in primary schools was increased by one year (from eight to nine years) for all students between six and fifteen years of age.
Secondary education is now com-pulsory for all students finishing the nine years of primary education.
These changes represent additional efforts for municipalities to perform and efficiently manage the primary and secondary education.
2.4. Findings from Municipalities Poll
Entering the second phase of decentralization leads municipalities to assume a higher stake in managing education related issues.
Financial obligations deriving from the disbursement of salaries now under the municipal payroll are combined with the management of properties and staff.
To achieve this, municipalities establish an ad-ministrative unit, staffed with qualified people, which deals only with education as a competence.
To the question of the survey ‘Has your municipality already established an administra-tive unit for education’?, 45 per cent of the municipalities answered ‘yes’, while 55 per cent ‘not yet’.
This shows that the process of establishing administrative units has not been completed (see Fig. 1.)
The findings of the Survey also show that of all municipalities that have established administrative units, 70 per cent of them are urban units whereas 30 per cent are rural ones.
It can be understood that even though some rural municipalities have probably entered the second phase of the decentralization process, they are not still in a situa-tion to create such an education unit within their administration (see Fig. 2).
In line with the newly adopted legislation in the field of education school level16, stakeholders (the School Board) now play a more important role than before.
Amend-ments to the laws on primary and secondary education, and deriving from the Law on Local Self-Government (2002), redefined the role of the school board by empowering it with the authority to select and dismiss the school principal, to set the school budget and to adopt the school statute.
Hence, regular contacts with principals and with the school board members are nec-essary in order to ensure quality management of the education.
To the question ‘How often does your municipality meet the principals and the school board members’?, 8 per cent of the municipalities stated every day, and 42 per cent said once a year, while 25 per cent each answered that they meet every week and once a month respectively (see Fig. 3).
Feedback on the evaluation of school principals and school boards are largely positive.
Seventy one percent of the municipalities with daily contacts with the school stake-holders evaluate their performance as ‘excellent’.
On the other hand, the municipalities with scarce contacts with the school management assessed their work as ‘not good’ in 70 per cent of the cases, whereas only in 10 per cent of the cases they evaluate their work as ‘excellent’, (more details in the Fig. 4).
Regarding the question, ‘Do you think that school level stakeholders (principals, mem-bers of the school boards, teachers and parents) know their rights, roles and respon-sibilities’?, 79 per cent of the municipalities have responded positively while 21 per cent have stated that the school level stakeholders do not know their rights, roles and responsibilities (Fig. 5).
This does not mean that the LSGUs should not continue pro-moting the rights, roles and responsibilities of the school level stakeholders.
Municipalities have also been asked about ‘Which of the stakeholders require train-ing on the issues of education and decentralization’?
Results show that 40 per cent of the municipalities think that School Board members require additional trainings for strengthening their capacities, 25 per cent reckon that teachers require trainings, 20 per cent identify school secretaries, while school principals are considered less in need of trainings (see Fig. 6).
One of the arguments in favor of decentralized education (Levitas, 2002) relates to managerial efficiency and effectiveness and to de-politicization of the education system.
The assumption is that, since the national ministries were farther from schools than the local authorities, many decisions at the local level were done according to political affiliation and its influence.
The decisions brought from a central level concerning the education matter at the local level and the experience with other related issues before the decentralization process, also showed that the education system was very centralized and politicized.
Answers to the question ‘Since the decentralization process started, the influence of politics in education has increased, decreased or is it same as before?’ showed that 47 per cent of the municipalities think that the influence of politics in education has ‘de-creased’, since the process of decentralization started, 13 per cent of them think that the influence has ‘increased’ while 40 per cent say that the level of influence ‘remained unvaried’, (see Fig. 7).
Asked about their relations with the Ministry of Education and its branches, 45 per cent of the municipalities answered that they have ‘poor’ relations with the relevant central authorities, 34 per cent reported to have ‘good’ relations with the MoE , whereas 21 per cent have ‘excellent’ relations with the Ministry (see more details at Fig. 8).
Feed-back on relations with the various branches of the MoE18 is generally more positive than the figures relating directly to the MoE.
All these branches are not decentralized, being managed from the central government (Ministry of Education).
Communication with the line Ministry does not appear to be exempted from political influences: the municipalities where mayors share the same political background of the current government seem to have better relations with the Ministry of Education (73 per cent have ‘good relations with the MoE and 27 per cent have ‘excellent’ rela-tions) compared to the overall data (Fig. 9).
The municipalities were finally asked about the desired requirements for delivering better services in the primary and secondary education.
Fifty five percent of the mu-nicipalities think that they further need to strengthen the capacities of the school level bodies (i.e. the principal, school board and teachers council), while 30 per cent say they should allocate more funds from their municipal budget (see Fig. 10).
2.5. Findings from Citizens Poll
Besides the input received from the municipalities, the survey also includes opinions of citizens on issues related to education and decentralization.
Five hundred twenty five citizens19 were surveyed on a questionnaire similar to the one delivered to the municipalities, in order to match instance from municipalities with expectations by the final users of the education services.
Citizens were asked to comment on their perception on the process of decentraliza-tion since its beginning, and particularly whether the management of education com-petency at the local level has improved, has not improved or remained as before.
The findings are as follows: 50 per cent stated that the management of education at the local level has ‘improved’, 14 per cent that it has ’not improved’ and 29 per cent that it 19Principals of schools (62), teachers (62), members of the school boards (62), parents of pupils (339) remained ‘same as before’ (see Fig. 11).
Citizens think that cooperation between the municipalities and the schools has im-proved since the process of decentralization, as 58 per cent of surveyed citizens con-sider that the co-operation is ‘good’, 17 per cent ‘excellent’, whereas only 11 per cent think that the co-operation is ‘poor’, (see Fig. 12).
The same question posed to the municipalities about the requirements for improving services in education offered the following results: 59 per cent of citizens answered that the municipalities should allocate more funds from their budget in order that their municipalities provide better services in the field of primary and secondary edu-cation, while 21 per cent say that the capacities of the school level bodies should be strengthened.
2.6. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Decentralization in education, as a continuous and creative series of changes and ac-tions, should be analyzed under different points of view: transfer and implementation of certain education competences from the central to the local government, existence of higher level of autonomy at the school level, citizens’ evaluation of education ser-vices and last but not least, the relations among three main stakeholder levels in the process of education i.e. the central level, the local level and the school level.
When considering decentralized education, municipal and school management must be given a relevant dimension.
Principals should manage their schools in close co-operation with the school boards.
They should be given the key responsibilities of the school boards as foreseen with the legislation on primary and secondary education and, above all, they should be under the supervision of local authorities (municipalities).
Namely, the main bodies in the whole cycle are the school boards, their structure comprising representatives of teachers, pedagogues and professional associates; parents; local self-government as well as a representative of the Ministry of Education and Science.
For strengthening the responsibility of all stakeholders at the school level and in the context of co-operation with the local self-government and the wider community, the School Boards should have the key role in school management; their structure and functions are specified by Law.
The legal framework is oriented to minimize political influence in school management, provided that the school boards operate effectively.
The main conclusions and recommendations are the following:
Three years after the decentralization process started, the stakeholders do know their rights, roles and responsibilities, which was not the case before.
Local au-thorities show seriousness in terms of managing the education in the best possible way.
Proof of this is the establishment of administrative units by most municipalities (55 per cent), dealing specifically with education issues.
This percentage is expected to rise in near future following the examples of the ones that have established the units.
Local authorities should intensify their communication and contacts with the school principals, the school board members and teachers, in order that the in-formation flow between all involved is circulated consistently.
Municipalities should further try to strengthen the capacities of the school level stakeholders, by providing training and other capacity building activities for raising their knowledge and understanding on their rights, roles and respon-sibilities in accordance with education and decentralization.
Although citizens responded that they know their rights, roles and responsibilities (79 per cent), strengthening the capacities of the school level stakeholders is still necessary (40 per cent of the LSGUs think that the school board needs additional capacity building training).
Political influence in education management should be minimized and be neutralized by all means.
One of the arguments in favor of decentralized education refers to managerial efficiency and effectiveness and to de-politicization of the educational system.
The assumption before the decentralization was that the education system was politicized and that with the decentralization the de-po-liticization would be ensured.
Although the primary and secondary education is managed from the local level, there is a need for better co-operation among municipalities and the Ministry of Education (MoE) and its branches.
The Survey findings show that some munici-palities still have poor relations with the MoE and this leads to miscommunication when the process of decentralization in education should be completed.
Municipalities are aware that they should strengthen the capacities of the man-agers of the schools, school boards, teachers’ councils and other school level stakeholders but this needs to be put into practice, by allocating more funds from the municipal budget for education purposes.
This idea was supported by the citizens when asked similar questions.
3. Communal Services
3.1. General introduction
Proper management of communal enterprises by municipalities generates a number of benefits for local governments.
German municipalities have experience in establish-ing profit public companies as wellness and spa centers, public transport companies, management of tourist attractions.
In many cases these companies are the generator for local economic development.
Setting the prices and collection of fees has always been a challenge especially in tran-sition countries.
Public service prices have traditionally been lower than the service real costs due to political strategies influenced by weak economic standards and such policy has resulted in poor companies and bad services.
In order to provide adequate services the prices have to be based on real expenses22 and must cover amortization costs as well as funds for investment.
The collection of fees has always been a sig-nificant problem for communal enterprises.
Regular collection of fees determines the enterprise output, and enables the delivery of better services at lower prices.
Management is a key issue for communal enterprises.
Municipalities appoint the man-aging structure of communal enterprises, and mayors appoint managers while mu-nicipal councils select the members of managing boards and decide on initial invest-ment in equipment and facilities.
The Law on Public Enterprises envisages managing boards composed of 5 to 11 members, selected among available experts in communal service delivery.
Boards should also include representatives of the company’s employees.
The municipality (the mayor and the council) supervises the company outputs, adopts annual working plans, the annual finance bill, and reviews reports.
The prices of services are set by the municipal council upon proposal of the communal enterprise management.
3.2. Findings of the Survey 2008
Most of the assessed communal enterprises were established between 1996 and 2007, probably as a result of the Law on Local Self-Government in 1996, a benchmark in the process of the decentralization and development of local self-government.
Although a relevant number of enterprises date back to the 50s and 60s, these records show a relatively short tradition in the management of communal enterprises.
Chart No. 2 outlines the high frequency of changes in the management of communal enterprises.
Only 3 managers served with continuity for the last 10 years, while in other municipalities turnovers occurred up to 7 times.
Managers have been replaced on av-erage once every 2.8 years.
It is questionable whether sound strategies can be imple-mented in such a timeframe.
Frequent changes in management may be the result of inadequate planning by municipalities or unsatisfactory performances by appointed managers.
Five municipalities reported their communal enterprise to have an e-mail address, and only one mentioned a communal enterprise web site.
This confirms scarce use by com-munal enterprises of the internet and modern technology for communicating not only with citizens/customers but also within the company.
Better sharing of information through modern technology will strengthen public trust in the communal enterprises and might prompt higher rates in fee collection.
Thirty seven out of the 67 assessed municipalities reported their communal enter-prises to have debts, for a total amount of 1,175,710,040 MKD.
Heavy debts seriously affect municipal budgets and limit the effectiveness of policies.
Eighty-two percent of the interviewed municipalities positively evaluated the perfor-mance of their communal enterprise, while only 53 per cent of the polled citizens25shared the same appraisal, in most of the cases ranking their communal enterprise services between 3 and 4 on a scale when 1 is the worst and 5 is the best.
Fifty two percent of our opinion poll sample stated that the communal services prices are inappropriate.
The majority of these citizens (92 per cent) consider prices to be too high and only 5 per cent reckon them to be lower than they should be.
Sixty three percent of the citizens would not agree to pay higher prices even if the services were better, and 91 per cent claimed to pay regularly communal enterprises fees.
Low incomes are the most frequent reason for unpaid bills.
As previously mentioned, proper price setting is one of the most important require-ments for a sustainable and effective service delivery.
Only 46 per cent of the mu-nicipalities consider charged fees to be in line with the services real cost, which means that prices are lower than real costs in 54 per cent of the cases.
When fees do not cover expenditures, there are two options: prices must be increased, or expenses must be reduced.
A third option is subsidizing the work of the communal enterprise from the municipal budget.
Further analysis and assessment regarding the setting of the prices is needed; collected results showed large ranges in price setting among municipalities.
Regarding the price for collection of 1 ton of garbage, prices reported by the municipalities range from couple of hundred MKD to few thousands MKD.
This may indicate that the mu-nicipalities do not have enough data or systems to follow the work of their public en-terprises or do not have the capacity to make a proper assessment of the expenses and cost related to their services in order to set the prices accordingly.
3.3. How to improve the work of the communal enterprises?
This survey investigated the problems faced by municipalities in communal service delivery and on their strategies to tackle such issues.
A recurring hurdle for many municipalities and communal enterprises is the lack of financial resources, which are needed in order to procure necessary equipment.
Both the citizens and the munici-palities identified the lack of equipment as a major problem that prevents improved service provision.
The biggest number (78 per cent) of municipalities considers the lack of equipment as the biggest problem for the communal enterprises.
If we compare the results of the Chart No. 6 on the opinion of the municipalities with the opinion of the citizens in the citizens poll ordered by the OSCE we will get opposite and different perceptions:
Lack of assistance by the state was mentioned by 54 per cent of municipalities, which is a significant number.
This survey did not explore the reasons and what kind of state assistance is requested.
In line with this opinion we have to mention that 85.5 per cent of municipalities stated that they agree that the Law on Public Enterprises is good.
Ad-ditionally the state had positive response to the request to lower the VAT rate for com-munal services to 5 per cent which was one of the major problems for the communal enterprises and municipalities during the OSCE survey in 2007.
According to the citizens’ opinion, lack of equipment is stated as the biggest prob-lem for the communal enterprises.
Great number of citizens supports the purchase of equipment as a necessity but they believe that this should be done within the current pricing of the services.
The opinion of the citizens regarding the more “honest” work can be interpreted as a view of the citizens that the companies can improve the way they lower unnecessary expenditures.
While the citizens are not willing to pay more for the services (Chart No. 5) the communal enterprises and the municipalities are challenged to find ways how to utilize better the current assets with better management and to provide better fi-nancial conditions by cutting down expenses.
The following Chart No. 8 shows that the majority (67 per cent) of the municipal strategies to improve the services refer to providing equipment for their communal enterprise.
Only 33 per cent of the municipalities consider the Public Private Partnerships - PPP as a tool for service improvement; and 25 per cent intends to enter in Inter-Municipal Co-operation - IMC agreements.
Even fewer consider outsourcing (i.e. purchase services from the neighboring municipalities).
Nineteen per cent of the municipalities deem that ISO standards will improve communal service delivery.
When analyzing (Chart No. 9) the obstacles to improving the services, lack of finances is considered the predominant obstacle for 87 per cent of the municipalities.
The rea-son for the lack of finances an equal number (34 per cent in both cases) of municipali-ties consider to be the low fee collection and the low prices of the services.
3.4. Garbage separation
The survey assessed citizens’ readiness to participate in the garbage recycling, an ac-tivity which could be a source of income for the municipalities and the communal enterprises.
An overwhelming majority of the polled population would commit itself in garbage separation activities.
Citizens in favor of garbage recycling expect their municipality and communal enter-prise to take actions such as providing equipment (special containers), running aware-ness campaigns and reducing fees on other communal services.
3.5. Recommendations
Most of the transition countries in South-East Europe inherited weak systems of com-munal service provision due to unrealistic prices, inefficient communal enterprises, lack of equipment and obsolete infrastructures (i.e. water and sewage networks).
Many programs have since then been implemented for improving service provi-sion, and nearly all implied additional investments and a consequent matching of charged fees with service costs.
In other words, experience shows that better results are possible at the cost of reviewing prices.
This does not seem to be a viable solu-tion when considering the current economic constraints and a general reluctance to accept higher fees.
It is therefore necessary to consider further possibilities for more efficient and ef-fective service provision, thus enabling a cost reduction for communal enterprises activities.
This requires development of sound strategies and plans by a carefully selected management and more capacity building initiatives for the current staff in the municipal companies.
Several strategies can be pursued for increasing the efficiency of communal compa-nies, for instance, assessing municipal capacities in terms of covered territory and/or consumers served.
This will help in choosing the best and cheapest way for service provision (Inter-Municipal Co-operation by the establishment of a joint enterprise, Public Private Partnership or outsourcing by buying services from a private company or a neighboring municipality’s communal enterprise).
Debt management currently stands out as a serious threat to municipal communal enterprises, both for the amounts at stake and the alleged inability of companies and municipalities to deal efficiently with it.
The matter must soon be addressed, without the risk of leaving large sectors of the population destitute of basic supplies such as water.
For instance, the central authorities can play an intermediary role and possibly enable municipalities to raise loans from the commercial banks under pref-erential conditions.
This is necessary because the old debts of the communal enter-prises block the enterprise account.
This blocks the work of the enterprise because it prevents regular payments.
Additionally the enterprises debts are increasing be-cause the compound interest rate is much higher than the interest rates of the bank loans.
Enabling bank loans for the purpose of reprogramming existing debts would provide several benefits.
By using bank loans the enterprises and the municipalities will be able to reschedule their debts and to plan their repayment by installments.
The payment of the installments will be planned in the budget of the enterprise and it will not block its bank account.
This will ensure continuous provision of services and lower expenses for the enterprises and the municipality, alike.
The establishment of a Municipal Consumers Council28 would help municipalities to improve communication with the citizens.
The Council would serve as a forum for discussing fee collection and negotiating appropriate prices in regard to the desired quality of the services.
4.Local Economic Development
4.1. Introduction and legal background
The Law on Local Self-Government enacted in 2002 substantially enlarges the com-petences of local officials, and LED (Local Economic Development) was one of the first responsibilities transferred to the municipal level.
Article 22 of the Law on Local Self-Government29 prescribes the LED as a local self-government competence and leaves room for the municipalities to construct their own method of planning and imple-menting LED activities.
Another important part of the general legal framework on LED is the 2007 Law on Balanced Regional Development, the aim of which is to determine the goals, regulations and bearers of the policy for regional development planning, financing and allocation of funds for balanced regional development, evaluation and monitoring of the implementation of the development plans and projects and other related issues.
A thorough implementation of the Local Economic Development concept requires serious engagement by the municipalities in terms of human and financial resources in order to foster growth and improve living standards within their respective munici-pal area.
This chapter depicts the status of LED as a cross-cutting competence of the local self-government units both from a municipal and a business community perspective.
It provides information on the active approach the municipalities have been taking to-wards LED (systematic or ad hoc based) and the state of affairs of the LED plans, as well as the most frequent activities and obstacles for their implementation.
Furthermore, it checks on the existence of accurate information on the local opera-tional businesses as a basis for future planning of LED, the role and importance of the PPPs as an LED tool, the frequency of engagement of municipalities in cross border co-operations and the role and activities implemented within the existing planning regions for equal regional development.
A review of financing methods for activities conducted by the LED offices or the LED Coordinators will be followed by trends in allocation of municipal budget funds for LED and by the main expectations from the central government.
An outline of the municipal budgets allocated for balanced regional development will also be given.
Finally, the chapter points out the efforts of the municipalities to improve the busi-ness climate and the perception of the business community on their relevance and success.
4.2. Municipalities
The results show that 61 per cent of the surveyed municipalities have formally planned their LED activities for the period 2007-2008.
An increase of 6.7 per cent can be noted when compared to the last year survey results.
Municipal strategies for LED are most usually planned on a 4 to 5 year time frame.
Twelve and a half per cent of the munici-palities covered the period 2003-2008 and 40.3 per cent covered 2007-2013.
A negligible number of municipalities have already developed the LED long term plans (for instance, Tearce LED plan covers the period 2006-2016 and Veles has planned LED until 2020).
The most common obstacles preventing the municipalities from smoothly imple-menting their LED plans are outlined in Chart 1.
Seventy three point six per cent of the interviewed administrations identified lack of funds as the main hurdle, while 37.5 per cent reported a lack of co-operation with the local business community and 29.17 per cent indicated a lack of administrative capacity and poor infrastructure.
Sixteen per cent of the municipalities admitted to bad planning (unrealistic deadlines in the LED plans), while a few municipalities refer to the lack of co-operation with the central government as the most common obstacle for the LED implementation.
As to the activities implemented in the period 2007-2008 to improve local economic development and the investment climate, the municipalities have considered the following:
Sixty one municipalities have improved the local infrastructure;
Fifty two have done promotional activities (campaigns, fairs, personal contacts with business communities);
Thirty six have improved and standardized their administrative procedures;
Sixteen have minimized the level of taxes for local companies;
Ten have established a private-public partnership; and
Nine have organized into a regional economic or business network.
Fifty four point two per cent confirmed they have a unified and updated data base on existing businesses and 41.2 per cent have not produced one.
Twenty six of the municipalities that have created a data base on the existing businesses updated it in the course of 2006 and 2007, whereas three municipalities have done most recent updates in the course of 2008.
On average, most municipalities allocated between 1 and 10 per cent of their budget for LED in the period 2006-2008.
Chart 2 gives evidence of the increasing trends in the municipal budget allocation for the LED in 2007 and 2008 compared to 2006.
(In 2006, only 8.3 per cent of the municipalities allocated between 1 and 10 per cent of their budget for LED activities, whereas in 2007 and 2008 this figure amounts to 16.7 per cent and 23.6 per cent respectively.)
On the other hand, the percentage of municipali-ties that allocate below 1 per cent for LED activities decreases in the period 2006-2008.
Approximately 4 to 5 per cent of municipalities stated that they have allocated above 10 per cent (in some cases even above 50 per cent) of their budgets for LED activities, but in such cases figures include donors’ grants earmarked for LED.
Approximately, only one quarter of the municipalities have established PPPs, where the most common activities implemented are listed below, ranked according to priority:
Financed the construction of infrastructure (roads, water supply, etc.)
Supported the construction of schools
Supported the construction of business centers
Supported the construction of municipal marketplaces
Support in drafting project documentation
Thirty six of the municipalities claimed to have been part of cross-border co-operation in the period 2007-2008.
Most frequently, they engage in cross-border co-operation with neighboring countries in the fields of tourism, culture and environment protection.
Sixty three per cent reported that they have appointed their representative to the cen-ter for balanced regional development 32of the planning region to which they belong; whereas 25 per cent have not appointed one.
Distributed per region, municipalities that have a representative in the respective center for balanced regional development are presented in Table 1.
Seventy four per cent of the municipalities stated that their center for balanced re-gional development is in the process of producing development strategies and plans.
Only 18 per cent of the municipalities stated that the implementation of development plans has started in their respective planning regions33.
About 6.8 per cent of munici-palities believe their centers have not implemented any balanced regional develop-ment activity whatsoever. (See chart 3).
Twenty four per cent of the municipalities reported that they have allocated less than one per cent of their municipal budget for balanced regional development in the pe-riod 2007-2008.
Table 2 gives an overview of the number of these municipalities per planning region and the average value of municipal budget allocated for balanced regional development.
Funds from the central budget for balanced regional development34 in the period 2007-2008 were only received by 3 municipalities, for a total of 2,453,200 MKD.
As a comparison, before the enactment of the Law on Balanced Regional Development, far more central budget funds were allocated for the purpose of regional development (see table 3).
With regard to the methods of financing LED activities (relevant data exhibited in Chart 4), about 87.5 per cent of the municipalities use donor assistance, nearly the same number of them were able to provide municipal budget funds in the period 2007-2008 for LED.
Twenty six point three per cent use partnerships with the local business com-munity as a method to finance LED activities and an insignificant portion claim to have used central government funds.
Compared to the period 2006-2007, during which only 53 per cent of the municipali-ties stated to have allocated municipal budget funds for the LED, an increase of nearly 30 per cent has been reported for 2007-2008.
Chart 5 depicts the municipal perceptions on the unemployment rates.
Most of the municipalities (about 33.33 per cent), record an unemployment rate between 30 and 40 per cent, evenly divided in urban and rural.
Nearly 31 per cent of municipalities re-ported an unemployment rate of above 40 per cent, with rural municipalities prevail-ing in this group.
Fourteen municipalities reported an unemployment rate between 20 and 30 per cent and only 6 municipalities between 10 and 20 per cent.
4.3. Perception of citizens (opinion poll)
Opinion poll results point out that 59.26 per cent of the business community 35 ex-pects the municipalities to attract investors; whereas a relevant percentage (53.09) ex-pects the municipalities to provide business with investment funds (chart 6).
As outlined in Chart 7, 70.37 per cent of the surveyed businessmen do not consider their municipality to be properly performing the LED competences.
Only 18.52 per cent feel business improvement on the local level since the transfer of competences.
With respect to PPPs, forty eight per cent answered that no PPP exists in their respec-tive municipality; the same percentage do not know about the existence of any PPP.
Only nearly 4 per cent confirmed the existence of a PPP, out of which only 1.2 per cent declared to have an active participation in the municipal PPP.
4.4. Conclusion and Recommendations
From the survey results it can be concluded that a substantial number of munici-palities pursue a systematic approach in planning their LED.
An increase compared to 2006-2007 is noted with regard to the number of municipalities that produced LED plans, mostly covering a period of 4 to 5 years.
Access to funds appears to be the most difficult obstacle in the implementation of the LED plans, and co-operation with the business community and solid administrative capacity are identified as of poor quality.
When building a favorable business and investment environment, municipalities mostly focus on improving the local infrastructure, promotional activities (campaigns, fairs) and standardizing the administrative procedures.
Only a small number recognize PPPs, regional economic networks and decreasing taxation for local business legal en-tities as effective methods for fostering LED.
Although positive trends in municipal budget allocation for LED have been registered, funds are still relatively low.
This proves that LED has not been treated as a key compe-tence by many municipalities.
When implementing LED, municipalities rely on donor assistance to the same extent that they use municipal budget funds.
Positive trends in comparison to 2006-2007 are noted in using all three financing methods (municipal budget, donor assistance and PPPs).
Municipalities engage in cross-border co-operation with the neighboring countries, mostly pursuing projects in tourism, culture and environment protection.
More than half of the municipalities have appointed their representative to the bal-anced regional development center, but most of the centers established are still in the process of developing their regional development strategies and plans.
According to the Survey results, only Polog, Pelagonija and the East planning region started imple-mentation of balanced regional development plans.
One center for balanced regional development has not been established yet (the South-west region).
The municipalities from the North-east region allocated on average the highest portion of their budget for balanced regional development, followed by the ones from Pelagonija, the South-east and East.
Other regions, according to the Survey results, do not rely on the mu-nicipal budgets when planning their development.
Even though the Law on Balanced Regional Development stipulates annually at least 1 per cent of the GDP (approximately 45 million Euros) through the Budget of the country to be allocated for this purpose, very few municipalities claim to have received cen-tral budget funds for balanced regional development in the period 2007-2008.
This, supported with the cited FOSIM report, leads to the general conclusion that the finan-cial support for balanced regional development offered by the state budget is far from the legally fixed level, hence the Central Government failed to fulfill its obligations.
Municipalities show awareness of the need for tackling local economic development effectively, and consequently the high unemployment rate.
Rural municipalities are particularly threatened by large unemployment, which is already causing massive im-migration to urban areas or abroad.
Local businessmen generally expect local officials to create a favorable investment and business environment, and many of them still expect municipalities to provide business investment funds and create concrete job opportunities.
A relevant number of businessmen do not consider their municipality to be properly performing its LED role and only one quarter felt some kind of improvement since the transfer of compe-tences.
The fact that few businessmen have been actively involved in a public private partnership with their respective municipality speaks of the non-existent co-operation between the two.
Building infrastructure, standardizing administrative procedures (preferably the ISO certification), strict law enforcement and a predictable business environment (local taxes and fees applicable to legal entities) are the key preconditions for attracting do-mestic and foreign investors.
The municipalities do not have a solid base for future LED planning.
They need to update their evidence of local business legal entities if they are to support them, and this requires a more serious approach and higher municipal investments in LED.
It can be concluded that there is a need for more capacity building for the LED officers in strategic planning, access to donor funds, development of proper application docu-ments and establishing partnerships with businesses and the civil society.
In addition, municipalities need to improve access to all relevant information to local entrepre-neurs.
Compared to 2006-2007, no progress has been made in terms of fostering local co-operation between the municipalities and the business community for LED purposes.
Businessmen and private entrepreneurs need to reestablish communication with the municipalities and recognize them as a partner, rather than as a bureaucratic burden.
A countrywide public awareness campaign for all relevant stakeholders (businessmen, the civil sector and municipal officials) would help reinforce the mutual benefits of a culture of co-operation.
The vital role of the public-private partnerships must be wide-ly recognized as propelling tool for reducing unemployment, poverty and improving the standard of living.
The central government needs to fulfill its obligations undertaken with the Law on Balanced Regional Development and the municipalities need to join infrastructural, natural and financial capacities towards building mutual co-operation networks.
The interest of donors in the enforcement of the Law is extremely helpful for achievements in the sphere of Local Economic Development.
5. Municipal Finance
5.1.1. THE STATUS OF FISCAL DECENTRALIZATION
July 2008 marked the end of the third year since the start of the fiscal decentralization in the country and, for a large number of local self-government units, the first year in the second phase of fiscal decentralization.
In accordance with the Law on Financing of Local Self-Government Units, the Gov-ernment established in January 2007 a Committee in charge of monitoring the level of fulfillment of requirements for entering the second phase of fiscal decentralization by municipalities.
The financial results of all local self-government units had to be as-sessed within the first 24 months of the fiscal decentralization, and the municipalities presenting performances in line with the conditions specified in the Law36 should be granted access to the second phase.
The Committee considered 42 municipalities ready to enter the second phase as of September 2007, followed by additional 9 municipalities on January 1st 2008, 6 municipalities39 on April 1st 2008 and 5 munici-palities40 on July 1st 2008.
A recent report by the Ministry of Finance foreseeing the inclusion of 4 more municipalities as of January 1st 2009 has not yet been adopted by the Government.
Should the Government endorse the report, 66 local self-govern-ment units will soon be included in the second phase of fiscal decentralization.
These municipalities receive block grants for financing several competences (primary and secondary education, culture, social welfare, child protection and health care).
In addition to the earmarked grants already in place for financing these competences, the block grants foreseen by the second phase cover the salaries of staff (e.g. teachers) employed in the institutions now to be financed by the local self-government units.
Administering the increased funds assumed possessing adequate administrative capacity on the part of the municipalities to manage these funds.
Methodologies for allocating the 2009 block grants were published in June 2008.
The Ministry of Finance specified the exact amount to be received by the municipalities in 2009 out of block grants, value added tax and personal income tax with a short delay from the deadline set in the Law on Financing the Local Self-Government Units (30th September).
To date, 19 municipalities have not yet been included in the second phase of fiscal de-centralization.
Nine of them do not even fulfill the conditions related to the first phase (i.e. the hiring of 3 employees working in the area of financing and 2 in tax administra-tion).
Fifteen municipalities are burdened by consistent debts and their bank accounts are currently blocked.
The Association of the Units of Local Self-Government (ZELS) estimates the municipal aggregate debt to have dropped from 51 to approximately 10 million euros since the start of the decentralization process.
5.1.2. MAIN AMENDMENTS TO THE LEGISLATION IN THE AREA OF LOCAL FINANCING
Since July 2007 several legislative changes have been introduced for improving the financial conditions of the local self-government units.
The most significant changes concerned the following acts:
– The Law on Amending and Supplementing the Law on Budgets (Official Gazette No. 4/08, 103/08)
– The Law on Property Taxes (Official Gazette No. 92/07)
– The Law on Construction Land (Official Gazette No. 82/08)
– The Law on Amending and Supplementing the Law on Construction (Official Gazette No. 82/08)
The main novelty introduced by the Law on Amending and Supplementing the Law on Budgets refers to the obligation of the local self-government units to adopt three-year plans for development programs besides general and special programming.
Plans should be in compliance with the Budget Circular sent by the Ministry of Finance, and will have to be submitted by the mayors to the municipal councils for approval by 20thOctober each calendar year for the following three-year period.
Once adopted by the council, this plan becomes a constituent part of the municipal budget.
The introduc-tion of multi-annual plans imposes necessary planning skills and financial manage-ment knowledge on the municipal administration in charge of financial issues.
With the new changes, mayors can decide to increase debt repayments should rev-enues be higher than those planned.
Moreover, the deadline for adopting budget re-balances has been extended from 1st September to 15th November.
Amendments to the Law on Property Taxes which entered into force on 1st January 2008 allow the mayors to write off – upon approval by the municipal councils – the tax liabilities if the costs for collection are proved to exceed the amounts of defaults.
Several novelties were introduced by the amendments to the Law on Construction Land and the Law on Supplementing and Amending the Law on Construction.
Article 56 of the Law on Amending and Supplementing the Law on Construction stipulates that the administrative body responsible for performing financial activities (the finance unit in the municipality), shall transfer the revenues for the charge for urbanization of the construction land and the charge for production of urban plans41 to the account of the state administrative body (Agency for Spatial Planning) responsible for urbanization of the land, once the legal acts are timely issued by the municipality.
The total of these revenues is divided into 30 per cent for the state/ the central budget (for the production of spatial planning of the state) and 70 per cent for the municipality which implemented them.
According to Article 14 of the Law on Construction Land, the income from selling and renting of public construction land shall be divided between the central authorities and the municipalities in a ratio of 60:40.
For urbanization42 of construction land, in-vestors must pay a charge and the height of it depends on the stage of urbanization i.e. the communal infrastructure that already exists on the land.
Related income shall enter the municipal budgets and must be allocated for financing the urbanization of the construction land.
Another change worth mentioning is the amendment to the Law on the Central Reg-istry.
As of July 2008, the local self-government units, along with the Government and other administrative bodies, can use the data from the Central Registry free of charge.
As a result, the local self-government units can use the data of all legal entities subject to utilities payment on their territory entered in the trade registry.
In addition, the Cen-tral Registry will regularly inform the local self-government units about any update; this will enable efficient maintenance of municipal taxpayer registers.
5.1.3. THE STRUCTURE OF MUNICIPAL REVENUES AND EXPENDITURES
1.3.1. Structure of Municipal Revenues
Local government revenues have increased manifold since the start of the fiscal de-centralization in 2005.
The first rapid increase was registered in 2006 and the second in 2008, in correspondence with the start of each of the two fiscal decentralization phases.
Unlike in 2005 - when the local budgets expanded the number of programs (to complement the transfer of competences from the central to the local level) - in the last 12 months, the amount of revenues to finance the same number of programs/de-centralized competences has increased.
A particular increase due to the block grants covering the salaries of staff in education, culture and social welfare has been regis-tered in transfers and grants.
The trend of local government revenues in the period 2004-2007, as well as their structure per revenue categories is presented in the follow-ing table.
Municipal revenues in 2007 were 40 per cent higher than in 2006.
The structure of the revenue categories in 2007 remained approximately the same as in the previous year, since the transfers and grants (49.33 per cent) still represent the main entry in the aggregate revenues, followed by tax revenues (37.78 per cent) and non-tax revenues (11.81 per cent).
The trend of local revenue per category over the period 2004 – 2007 is outlined in the following chart.
If fiscal decentralization is to finally make local self-government units less dependent on central government transfers, a positive trend can be detected in the country.
Tax revenues in 2007 were 22.16 per cent higher than in 2006, a more consistent incre-ment than the one observed between 2006 and 2005 (+9.25 per cent).
Similar paces of growth in transfers and grants were registered in 2007-2006 (+63.37 per cent) and in 2006-2005 (+65.87 per cent).
Data related to 2006 can be explained by the first full year of the decentralized competences and new financing schemes (financing from own revenues and transfers and grants).
In 2007, increases are due to the block grants assigned to the municipalities admitted to the second phase of the fiscal decentralization.
However, the 2007 share of the local government revenues on GDP (3.38 per cent) ranks the country still in the last position if compared with the countries recently ad-mitted to the EU, even though this parameter increased from previous years (2.65 per cent in 2006, 2.01 per cent in 2005, 1.87 per cent in 2004).
In 2007 the local revenues per inhabitant amounted to 5,536 denars45 i.e. +40 per cent on 2006 (3,973 denars).
Out of 51 municipalities which provided data on their total revenues in 2007, no significant difference was reported between the rural (2,173.63 denars per capita on average) and urban municipalities (2,479.62 denars per capita).
Nonetheless, significant imbalance could be detected when comparing single munici-palities across the country.
For instance, the municipality with the highest revenues per capita (Centar) indicated an amount of 9,582 denars, followed by the Municipal-ity of Demir Hisar and the Municipality of Resen.
As for the transfers from the central budget and the budgets of the funds, the Municipality of Bitola guides the list of the assessed municipalities, followed by the Municipality of Karpos and the Municipality of Gjorce Petrov.
The total revenues in 2007 per statistical regions, are presented in the following table.
Unsurprisingly, the region of Skopje ranks first both in terms of total revenues and average revenues per region.
1.3.2 Structure of Municipal Expenditures
The local self-government units are in charge of financing all the competences listed in the Law on Local Self-Government.
Adequate revenue sources are a crucial require-ment for performing these competences successfully.
The local expenditures 2004-2007 structured per categories are outlined in the table below.
In 2007 the structure of expenditures remained similar to the one registered in 2006.
The largest increase refers to the wages and salaries in education, culture and social welfare, now in municipal payrolls and, financed through block grants.
In absolute terms, subsidies and transfers observed a 61.49 per cent increase as compared to 2006, while goods and services went up by 14.72 per cent.
Trends in local government ex-penditures 2004-2007 are presented in the chart below.
In 2007 the share of local government expenditures on GDP49 amounted to 2.91 per cent.
This represents a slight increase from 2006 (2.47 per cent), though still insuffi-cient for moving the country from the last position when compared with the countries recently admitted to the EU.
These figures can be observed in the following table.
5.2. MAIN FINDINGS
5.2.1. State of affairs in the local self-government units
General financial conditions in the local self-government units
Three years after the start of the fiscal decentralization most of the municipalities already accessed the second phase.
The municipalities polled were asked about the main difficulties in implementing decentralization.
Sixteen out of the 72 assessed municipalities claimed to be currently out of phase 2.
The main reported reason is an unresolved debt (11 municipalities), the lack of staff for financial management (2 municipalities) and the lack of staff for administration of taxes and fees (3 municipalities).
Most of these municipalities undertake different activities for overcoming the situation.
The following table outlines their efforts for entering the second phase.
In order to continue with reforms on local governance, all municipalities are expected to enter the second phase of the fiscal decentralization during the course of 2009.
5.2.2. Budgeting Process
Budgeting Process and Participatory Budgeting
Fiscal decentralization - especially in the second phase - requires increased municipal capacity in financial management and the budgeting process.
In the last three years local capacities for planning and execution of the budget have significantly increased.
In comparison to 2005 (41 per cent) and 2006 (31 per cent), in 2007 only 11 per cent of the respondents Missing,3failed to adopt a budget calendar for their 2008 budget activities.
It is worth stressing that this instru-ment serves as a tool for improved planning, setting deadlines for each activity in the budget process, as well as for defining the role and participation, i.e. the input needed from the relevant stakeholders.
Most of the local self-government units acquired the practice of following the adopted budget cal-Yes, 61endar.
Nearly 82 per cent of the considered municipalities reported that they follow it, which is a sig-nificant improvement compared to 66.7 per cent of the last year’s survey.
The main reason for not using the budget calendar is the scarce confidence in tools of this kind.
By adopting and following the budget calendar, the local self-government units would be able to timely plan citizens’ involvement in the several phases of the budget adoption and the budget execution.
This would ensure a higher level of transparen-cy and accountability in municipal management, and consequently, Yes, 59an increase in the revenues from local taxes.
There is a clear correlation between the adoption of the budget calendars and the level of participatory budgeting, as highlighted by the table below.
This survey noticed that 80.6 per cent of the respondents include citizens in the pro-cess of budgeting, less than the 88.5 percent registered in 2007 but more than in 2006, when only 67 per cent stated that they involve citizens in the budgeting process through public hearings.
Most of the local self-government units (40.3 per cent) orga-nize up to 5 meetings annually for setting the priorities to be financed in the following year.
Figures related to the frequency of public gatherings on budgeting topics are presented in the following chart.
The local self-government units organize public events to present the annual account (i.e. the implementation of the budget of the previous year and the budget for the fol-lowing budget year).
Such gatherings have a positive influence on transparency and accountability, as they enable citizens to get acquainted with the local funds manage-ment.
The findings on annual account presentations in 2007 and 2008 are illustrated below.
Public events are no longer the main way of informing citizens on municipal budgets.
If in 2007 most of the respondents (93.2 per cent) used citizens’ gatherings to present the 2007 budget and 2006 annual account, this year 39 local self-government units (or 54.2 per cent of the respondents) informed their citizens through the local media.
The local self-government units use different methods for sharing information with their citizens on financial issues.
Neighborhood self-government units, bulletin boards, municipal web pages or the municipal official gazette are among the most frequently reported ways of communication.
Effective outreach and dissemination of information depends on several variables such as the municipal features (urban or rural), citizens’ educational background, access to electronic media, etc.
Timely Budget Adoption and Budget Execution
Adopting municipal budgets by 31December is considered an important indicator in terms of municipal planning capacities.
A timely adoption of budgets was one of the criteria for entering the second phase of the fiscal decentralization.
A large part (97.2 per cent) of the polled municipalities succeeded in adopting the 2008 budgets by 31 December 2007, which is a better result than in 2007 when 93 per cent adopted their budgets on time.
An even more important parameter for a municipal administration is the proper and timely execution of the budget.
In order to provide this, the Central Treasury at the Ministry of Finance imposes on local self-government units the submission of quar-terly reports on their revenue and expenditure execution at the onset of each fiscal trimester.
In ideal terms, the adopted budgets should be executed at a steady pace, i.e. 25 per cent per trimester, but in practice it is rarely the case.
This table shows that the majority of the local self-government units have earned up to 50 per cent of the expected revenues in the first six months of 2008 and 22.2 per cent of the respondents collected more than 51 per cent of the planned budget rev-enues.
In the first six months of 2007, thresholds were up to 40 per cent in 59 per cent of the cases, and between 41 and 60 per cent for 23 per cent of the respondents.
The ability to duly execute expenditures throughout the year distinguishes effective municipal managements; executing most of the planned expenditures in the last quarter of the year or close to the budget closing should be limited.
A sound financial management entails a balanced execution in all four quarters of the fiscal year.
Similarly to the figures related to the revenue execution, the majority of respondents or 56.9 per cent succeeded in carrying out up to 50 per cent of the planned expendi-tures in the first half of 2008.
Only 9.7 per cent of the respondents could not achieve more than 25 per cent of the expenditure execution in the first six months of the cur-rent fiscal year.
As mentioned earlier, sufficient revenues are to be at the disposal of the local self-government units for the latter to successfully perform their tasks.
The following set of questions was intended to assess local government perception over the adequacy of transfers from the central government, as well as their suggestions for improving the revenue base.
Collected answers show that 70 per cent of the respondents consider up to 30 per cent of the revenues from value added tax (VAT) should be transferred to the local self-government units.
The feedback on the possible allocation of the personal income tax is presented in the following chart.
Problems with arrears from previous years
Municipal debt is still a very serious threat faced by municipalities, although the situ-ation has significantly improved since 2005.
In July 2008 the Ministry of Finance re-quested each municipality to report on their arrears so to assess precisely the aggre-gate municipal debt.
Forty four out of the 72 municipalities interviewed in this survey have problems with arrears from previous years, as shown by the following chart.
The local self-government units were also asked if their bank accounts had ever been blocked or were blocked at that time.
Most of the detected financial constraints originate from arrears towards construction companies and lands expropriated before 1990 and not yet refunded.
The local self-government units with blocked accounts cannot use earmarked grants transferred by central government institutions such as the road fund or the water fund.
5.1.3. Administration of Local Taxes
Since the start of the fiscal decentralization, the municipalities can independently dis-pose of their own sources of revenue and decide - within certain extents- on their fiscal policies.
Some of the issues tackled in the survey relate to the accuracy of municipal taxpayers, databases and estimates of real estate values.
Database of Taxpayers
One of the primary tasks for the local self-government units in the last three years has been the set up of updated databases of taxpayers.
In 2008, 53 local self-government units out of the 72 respondents stated to have established their own tax administra-tion unit.
Answers under the category “other” include cases in which one municipal employee is in charge of administering taxes and fees, without an established unit.
The ten municipalities in the City of Skopje do not have the authority to administer their taxes and fees, which are managed at the city level.
Almost 78 per cent of the respondents have already updated their database of taxpayers. (They were 69 per cent in 2007.)
In 2008, 58.3 per cent of the polled municipalities managed to carry out an update of the real estate values, in comparison with the 47 per cent registered in 2007.
Updates of the taxpayers’ database and of the real estate estimate should have positive long-term effects on the revenue generation in the local self-government units.
5.1.4. System of Internal Control and Auditing
The local self-government units in the country are obliged to have authorized accoun-tants so as to ensure better internal controls and proper management of funds.
As of 2008 municipalities should establish independent units of internal audit, which shall be in charge of providing the Mayor and the municipal administration with objective assessments.
Internal auditing will improve administrative operations and limit violation of legislative regulations.
In 2008, 31 local self-government units reported that they have one internal auditor.
The current legislative provisions foresee the set up of a unit on internal audit in each municipality – but only larger municipalities can afford to comply (and still need to strengthen their units).
However, an increasing number of municipalities have hired an internal auditor.
Trends for 2006 to 2008 are illustrated here below.
5.1.5. Municipal Borrowing
The legislation allows municipalities to borrow once they fulfill a list of set criteria (series of positive financial results, no records of blocked account, and no arrears to creditors) and gets approval from the Ministry of Finance.
The assessed local self-gov-ernment units were asked whether they consider borrowing an interesting financial source in the period to come; almost half of the respondents answered positively.
The municipalities not considering borrowing a feasible option argued about the un-favorable borrowing conditions at the banks (19.4 per cent) or considered their finan-cial condition too risky for borrowing (19 per cent).
Among the municipalities interested in taking a loan or in issuing municipal bonds, only a minor part have already requested the Ministry of Finance for an approval on long-term borrowing, while 73.6 per cent of the respondents have not submitted such a request yet, for one of the following reasons:
Negative assessment of financial statements in last 2 years
Unpaid arrears to creditors 90 days after the due date
Other
In July 2008 Karpos was the first municipality to receive approval for borrowing from the Ministry of Finance, and was granted a loan for purchasing equipment for energy saving in one primary school.
Municipal borrowing could disclose new scenarios in local governance financing, but it also entails a number of risks to be carefully considered.
5.1.6. Needs for capacity building in the fiscal area
The decentralization process depends heavily on the municipal administration ca-pacities.
Although the international community invested significant funds in capacity building at the local level, most of the municipalities reported that they need addi-tional training in the area of municipal financing.
While in 2007 the demands for training mainly related to the budgeting process, in-ternal audit and internal control, in 2008 financial officers consider borrowing to be the topic area in which skills have to be enhanced, followed by internal control, the budgeting process and credit rating.
5.2.2. CITIZEN PERCEPTION
A representative sample of citizens were interviewed on the decentralization process, in order to measure its effectiveness in bringing power closer to the citizens and foster-ing citizens’ participation in the local decision-making.
The sample consisted of 1,059 citizens of the age above 18 years.
The aim was to assess the perception of that part of population that is or could be taxpayers and has the voting power to influence local decision making.
According to the survey results, the public opinion does not seem to be aware of the technical issues related to the fiscal decentralization.
Most citizens are not familiar with the sources from which the municipality is being financed.
This is presented in the following chart.
The majority of polled citizens know about the property tax as a source of financing for their municipality, as well as the communal fees, administrative fees and donations.
The structure of these answers is presented in the table below.
Significant revenues for the local self-government units come from taxes, fees and other duties to be paid by citizens.
Therefore, it is interesting to see citizen perception on the municipal tax level (particularly on property taxes).
The answers on the property tax do not differ significantly from the perceptions on the local duties: 55.7 per cent of the respondents are of the opinion that municipal duties are very high; and 31.4 per cent said that they are sufficient for the provision of municipal service.
Most of the citizens are not willing to pay higher duties even if the purpose of that would be the provision of better quality services.
Sixty-one per cent of the citizens would not agree to pay more to the municipality and 35 per cent would be willing to pay for better quality in municipal services.
Citizens in rural municipalities (38.7 per cent) are willing to pay higher duties more than the dwellers in urban municipalities (32.4 per cent).
The citizens offered different reasons for not agreeing to pay more for the provision of better services, financial constraints being the most common.
The citizens were asked if throughout the year they had meetings with the Mayor or the municipal administration.
Nearly 86 per cent of the respondents said they did not have any meetings with the local authorities, for which they gave different reasons (didn’t know about the open hours of the mayor, the mayor didn’t have time to meet with them, there was no need to meet the mayor, etc.).
As outlined before, an increasing number of municipalities claimed to put in practice participatory approaches in each step of the budgeting process.
The citizens do not seem to confirm these data:
Around 87 per cent of the citizens from the rural and 84.5 per cent from the urban municipalities said they were not consulted on the local priorities.
Asked about the most effective forms of communication between the municipality and the citizens, the respondents gave the following answers:
The last set of questions referred to citizens’ perception on corruption:
Almost 90 per cent of the respondents stated that they have never received requests for bribe as a condition for providing municipal service.
The citizens also reckon that corruption concerns the central government institutions more than the local authori-ties.
5.3. MUNCIPAL FINANCE - CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The 2008 survey on municipal financial management provides indicators and facts on the status of fiscal decentralization.
It shows how the process has been implemented during the three years since its launching, with a particular attention on the last 12 months (July 2007 – July 2008).
The execution of the municipal revenues and expen-ditures, the process of budgeting, administration of local taxes, internal control and audit and municipal borrowing have been areas in the focus of this year’s survey.
Positive steps were registered in terms of increasing local revenues.
However, the share of local revenues on the GDP and public consumption is still among the worst in the region.
Even though significant progress has been achieved in the last three years, additional challenges are yet to be faced.
Fiscal disparities in local revenues per capita imply the need for a revision of balances in the municipal financing with particular reference to transfers and grants, and eventually on municipal taxes and fees.
These efforts should be complemented with the introduction of other sources of revenues such as increased shares from the VAT and PIT or new shared incomes (e.g.: tax on revenues from games of chance).
An increasing number of local self-government units fulfill their legal obligations on the budget calendar adoption and related implementation as compared to 2007.
Still, the local self-government units have to improve in transparency and accountability through the participatory budgeting processes.
Even if the budget calendars are ad-opted and deadlines for the budget related activities respected, authorities need to include citizens more frequently in setting local priorities, and inform them on munici-pal financial management.
Citizens do not yet feel sufficiently involved in local deci-sion making, this being the main aim of decentralization.
The use of the local media, regular office hours for meeting the mayor, citizen information centers, have to be put in place in accordance with the profile of the municipality and its communities.
Most of the local self-government units adopted the 2008 budgets by 31st December 2007 and executed up to 50 per cent of the revenues and expenditures by 30th June 2008.
Such good results need to be effectively communicated to citizens.
Debts are still a main concern for municipalities, particularly those not yet qualifying for phase two of the fiscal decentralization.
Even though municipal debts were sig-nificantly reduced, relevant amounts are currently outstanding.
The Government – the Ministry of Finance – announced assistance in this area; joint efforts should produce positive results in the course of 2009.
Several local self-government units established units for administration of local taxes and fees.
Efforts were detected both in updates of the municipal databases of taxpay-ers, and of estimates of the real estate values.
Local taxes and non-tax revenues should be the core sources for financing the local programs, and they should therefore show further increase in the structure of municipal revenues.
In this respect, municipalities ought to respect deadlines for the delivery of tax bills, and regularly update the regis-63 Survey on Decentralization 2008ter of legal entities on their territories.
With the move into the second phase of the fiscal decentralization, municipalities can start considering borrowing as a source of local revenue.
The initial screening showed that the municipalities with strong administrative capacities are the most interested in this form of financing.
In the period to come, relations between banks and the local self-government units have to be strengthened as well as the municipal capacities in dealing with borrowing.
Additional incentive in this area will come from the Guarantee Fund, established by the United States Agency for International Development project in the country, which guarantees a certain per cent of the loan amount.
The improvement in establishing a system of internal control and internal auditing re-mains insufficient.
Only 35 per cent of the local self-government units have regulated the set-up of their own internal auditors and only few succeeded to establish units of internal audit, which still need to be strengthened with new staff.
We can conclude that in spite of the increasing number of municipalities with an internal auditor i.e. a unit of internal audit, bigger attention should be given to establishing the functions of internal control and audit in all units of the local self-government, either directly (own units) or through making arrangements for inter-municipal co-operation.
In the last three years OSCE and other donors in the country funded a number of programs to build the capacity of the local self-government units in the area of internal control and audit.
Since in this whole period the local self-government units failed to demonstrate better results in this area, monitoring and supervision of the Ministry of Finance has to be improved in order to ensure implementation of the legislative provisions.
On the basis of the answers in the citizens’ poll, it can be concluded that the local self-government units need to increase transparency in their operating.
Citizens need to feel that they have the power to decide about local priorities, since only in this way trust can be increased as well as the willingness to pay taxes and fees to the local gov-ernment.
As for the answers, citizens would not agree to pay higher duties in order to get better public services, and this is mainly because of the bad economic situation in the country.
On the other hand, the majority thinks that the current level of tax-esand fees is adequate for a quality service provision, if funds are used efficiently and purpose-wise by the local authorities.
As a closing remark, the decentralization process should be one of the priorities of the Government’s agenda – since it is also a part of the conditions this country needs to meet for the accession into the European Union.
The local self-government units need to be supported and praised in their efforts to achieve the expected results, both by the central government ministries and by the representatives of the international com-munity in the country.
The process of fiscal decentralization has to be led by assigning a powerful leader at the highest level of government and by setting clear benchmarks and a reform strategy as a direction for the period to come.
6. Urban Planning - Integration of Informal Settlements
6.1. Introduction
Informal settlements are human settlements, which, for a variety of reasons do not meet requirements for legal recognition and have been constructed without respect-ing formal procedures of legal ownership, transfer of ownership, as well as construc-tion and urban planning regulations.
For the most part, they are characterized by infor-mal and insecure land tenure, inadequate access to basic services (social and physical infrastructure and housing financing).
Sustainable urban management requires that informal settlements are integrated in the social, economic, spatial/physical and legal framework, particularly at the local level.
Successful regularization efforts contribute to long-term economic growth as well as to social equity, cohesion and stability in the municipalities.
Moreover, the social, economic and physical integration of informal settlements is a stipulation for meeting requirements for EU accession.
On the legislation side, the Vienna Declaration on National and Regional Policy and Programs regarding Informal Settlements in South Eastern Europe is the cornerstone document whose objective is to commonly agree on actions that will regularize (legal-ize) and improve informal settlements in a sustainable way and will prevent future settlements.
Hitherto, the Macedonian legislation covering this matter is inadequate and vague.
This chapter aims to enlighten the reader and give an insight as to the specifics of mu-nicipal service delivery on the subject of regularization (legalization) of informal settle-ments and more importantly to verify the level of citizen satisfaction with the activities of the local government on this subject.
There are a considerable number of informal settlements scattered in many municipalities, home to a large portion of the national population (the exact number or percentage cannot be traced but this phenomenon is especially present in the Roma communities).
Sound policies tackling this issue would imply the legalization and integration of informal settlements into surrounding urban and rural structures as a priority, in order to avoid social hardship and negative economic impact.
Also, this survey aims to authenticate the treatment of this problem by municipalities.
In view of the draft Law on Legalization of Informal Settlements56, it remains to be seen whether the municipalities have the vital capacity to include the informal settle-ments in their urban plans and contribute to their improvement.
Amongst others, two important factors need to be considered especially when addressing the problem of these illegal buildings: land ownership issues and the integration into functional land use which are to be determined in the urban plans.
Conclusively, this chapter provides data on the number of municipalities ready to deal with the problem of informal settlements, together with the feedback of citizens dwelling in such compounds and trying to regularize their objects.
6.2. Findings - Municipalities
Findings show that interviewed municipalities presented similar situations with refer-ence to informal settlements.
Data suggest that reasons for the existence of informal settlements are various, but poor quality in the Detailed Urban Plans (DUP) seems to top this list - 63.0 per cent (see Chart 1).
Costly communal fees (11.0 per cent) and (inappropriate) modes of calculating communal fees (1.4 per cent), respectively, are presented as less likely reasons for the existence of these structures.
Other reasons stated are: lack of appropriate legislation, poor inspections, low standard of living, non-urbanization of inhabited place etc.
An overwhelming majority of the municipalities are in favor of legalizing informal set-tlements, regardless of their construction date – 94.2 per cent, as opposed to 5.8 per cent that are not in favor.
This proportion is an encouraging one given the state of af-fairs affecting the DUP in the Yugoslav system, particularly before 1967 when informal settlements were tolerated to a certain extent.
Municipalities offer contrasting opinions on the draft Law on Legalization of Informal Settlements (Chart 2).
Out of 31 municipalities which positively commented the future approval of the law, 15 are rural and 16 are urban.
The same balance can be traced amongst those who gave negative responses: 16 urban and 16 rural municipalities.
This goes to say that existing skepticism (on the effect of the new Law) for half of the municipalities that answered this question is evenly dispersed among urban and rural municipalities, while municipalities that did not have a precise opinion on the matter can be probably considered as having doubts about the draft law.
Out of 72 received questionnaires, 64 were determined to answer the question on whether they have established a database on informal settlements.
Out of 64 munici-palities only 17 or 23.6 percent have established a database and 47 municipalities or 65.3 percent do not have a database.
Only 38 municipalities replied to the question about the number of received requests for legalization of illegal buildings.
Out of those that answered, 24 units of local self-government acknowledged receiving such requests, while 14 did not get any requests.
Those municipalities that provided an answer received a total of 625 requests for legal-ization of illegal buildings.
Chart 3 shows that municipalities have implemented a number of activities to prevent informal settlements from appearing.
Consequently, a vast majority of municipalities (83.1 per cent) think that consultations with citizens are vital for preventing the spread-ing of informal settlements.
A good number of the municipalities also answered that improved and standardized administrative procedures should be implemented to pre-vent a further outbreak of these illegal structures (57.6 per cent).
Thirty nine per cent think that raising awareness among citizens and 33.9 per cent that training municipal administration is necessary to prevent informal settlements.
Regarding the kind of support expected by municipalities from the central govern-ment/donor community to improve the situation with informal settlements, financial support has been identified as the most helpful (91.2 per cent).
Less than half of the municipalities or 42.1 per cent argued that technical expertise is a requirement in ad-dition to financial means.
To a lesser extent, other forms of support were mentioned: consultations with neighborhood self-government units, new DUPs, social housing, etc.
6.3. Findings – Opinion Poll
The opinion poll section on urban planning included a number of questions addressed to a total of 60 citizens.
The representative sample was taken from the City of Skopje.
Respondents were from the following 5 municipalities: Suto Orizari; Kisela Voda; Aero-drom; Gjorce Petrov and Butel.
Responses from citizens suggest that costly communal fees are seen as a possible rea-son for the existence of informal settlements by 39.5 per cent of the interviewed, while poor quality of the DUP is the second most mentioned reason (27.9 per cent).
The mode of calculating communal fees accounts for only 4.7 per cent.
Expectedly, one fifth of the respondents answered that all of the given responses, as a total, lead to the existence of informal settlements. (See chart No. 5)
Numerous answers were provided to the question about the reasons for building an illegal object, among others: the inheritance of the building; failing to receive a build-ing permit from the municipality; financial constraints; the lack of a DUP for the entire neighborhood; expectations of imminent legalization; or, surrounding buildings be-ing also illegal.
Thirty one point seven per cent of the citizens claimed to have submitted a formal re-quest to municipalities for legalizing their buildings; their demands had different out-comes.
The reasons for rejected requests can be categorized in the following manner: outstanding communal fees; higher fees than expected; incomplete documentation; and, request still under municipal review.
Only a small portion of the respondents (1.3 per cent) believe they have been discriminated against because of their ethnic back-ground, and none of these gave any further explanation or reported the matter to the competent authorities.
Citizens’ opinions on strategies adopted by their municipalities to cope with the is-sue of informal settlements are relatively different from those provided by municipal administrations, as shown by Chart 6., but contain an acknowledgement of municipal efforts in this sphere.
6.4. Conclusions and Recommendations
Municipal policies on informal settlements – in the current legislative vacuum – are inclined to regularization.
In spite of a somewhat bureaucratic approach, most of the municipalities have demonstrated readiness to tackle this problem.
The problem of informal settlements and adequate housing is likely to be on the de-velopment agenda for some time in the country.
Hence, further dedicated studies of informal settlements are required.
Future investigations/surveys should address issues that residents of informal settlements have identified as important: fair and swift ad-ministrative procedures for legalizing objects; an increased and proactive involvement of municipalities in processing individual cases; training for municipal administration – inspectors, urban planners.
(Training of the municipal administration was recognized as an important condition by both municipalities and citizens, alike.)
Relevant national and international stakeholders should consider providing financial support and technical expertise.
This is vital for training municipal administration and raising public awareness among ordinary citizens on the risks of building and dwell-ing in an informal settlement.
On the legislation side, it seems that the new Law on Legalization of Informal Settlements will help clarifying issues such as the role of each public institution in dealing with the matter.
(A good half of the municipalities are backing this claim.)
Conversely, several municipalities believe that even if the new Law is adopted it will not be fully implemented due to the poor financial situation of the citizens.
Further analysis needs to be carried out to verify this account e.g. assessment of deficits in the law and practice.
Coordination among all relevant subjects will be of the utmost importance for put-ting an end to future informal settlements and it seems that municipalities will have a remarkable stake in this.
A key issue for the urban planning process is the involvement of affected citizens as well as the governmental and non-governmental organizations.
Hence, consultations with citizens and awareness raising campaigns seem critical in handling this problem.
An interesting point of consideration is the status of the Roma population in the in-formal settlements.
Namely, the investigation (survey) was also carried out in the pre-dominantly Roma municipality of Suto Orizari.
The Roma population in this munici-pality lives in a variety of community forms, but mostly in substandard conditions of extreme poverty.
The informal settlements that can be found there are a result of nu-merous individual relocations, evictions and repartitions of some social cases.
It seems that regularization of the Roma informal settlements will pose a huge challenge for all stakeholders.
Meaningful measures for addressing this problem in the Roma commu-nities may be a rational and fair partnership with local authorities and the involvement of the NGO sector in raising public awareness among the Roma population59, particu-larly on the adoption of the new Law on Legalization of Informal Settlements.
The new Law stipulates the possibility of regularization through payment of communal fees.
A certain positive outcome of the legalization of informal settlements in the Roma com-munity (and all others for that matter) is improvement of the standard of living, and perhaps an increased income growth.
Affirmative action on the part of the municipali-ties in facilitating this process can be achieved by allocating budgets for implement-ing recommended activities as given in the National Action Plan for Housing of the Decade for Roma Inclusion and the Strategy for Roma in the Republic of Macedonia.
With reference to citizens, their inclusion in urban planning and the related decision-making processes will ensure higher transparency and equity.
Standard solutions for informal settlements do not appear to be a viable strategy.
This study confirms the het-erogeneous conditions of illegal compounds across the country and the consequent need for evaluating specific request from citizens on a case by case basis.
Municipal authorities therefore seem to be the most appropriate factor for addressing the issue thanks to their precise knowledge of each particular situation.
7. Final conclusions and recommendations
The 2008 report on the process of decentralization gives an overview of the progress of the process in several key areas, such as communal services, culture, education, ur-ban planning and local economic development.
On the basis of the information re-ceived from the survey conducted in the local self-government units and the citizen poll several key conclusions can be drawn and recommendations given.
The system of communal service provision in the country is still pretty weak, which implies a need for considering possibilities for increasing its efficiency and effective-ness, and enabling further cost reductions in the performance of communal activi-ties of the public enterprises.
In this regard municipalities should consider resolving the debts of communal enterprises, which remains the most serious problem in this area.
Informal settlements are the biggest problem that municipalities face in the area of urban planning.
For its resolution, relevant national and international stakeholders should provide financial support and technical expertise.
Culture is still considered centralized and there are still cultural assets that need to be centralized.
Their alloca-tion to municipalities could foster cultural development.
On the other hand, correct enforcement of the Law on Language might turn out to be overwhelmingly demand-ing for local authorities if these are left alone in guaranteeing all citizens’ rights.
In the area of education local authorities demonstrated improved management skills and awareness of the rights, roles and responsibilities.
What remains crucial for the period to come is to strengthen the capacities of the school level stakeholders, as well as to minimize the political influence in education management and better cooperation be-tween local and central government.
Negligible shares of the funds foreseen by the Law on Regional Development were effectively allocated to municipalities, a trend which must be promptly inverted if the country is to guarantee equal chances to all citizens and tackle the issue of migration from rural areas.
Municipalities mainly pursue a systematic approach in planning their local economic development activities and focus on improving local infrastructure, promotion, and standardization of administrative procedures.
Updating their data on local business entities is a challenge the local authorities will be facing for the period to come.
Fiscal decentralization registered progress in terms of resources available to munici-palities, not only in terms of self generated revenues but also for new sources now at the disposal of local governments.
In 2008 several achievements were recorded with reference to the financial conditions at local level: the number of municipalities enter-ing in the second phase of fiscal decentralization has increased; authorities reported a sensible cut of municipal debts; local governments were granted additional sources of income (e.g. a share from sales of public land); and tools for more efficient planning of resources such as the three-year plans for development programs have been intro-duced.
As reported in this survey, the public seems to appreciate the results of implemented reforms.
A general perception of low corruption in local governance speaks in favour of further allocation of tasks from central to municipal level.
This report, however, outlines an unsatisfactory level of involvement of citizens in lo-cal decision making processes.
Municipalities evidenced efforts to ensure proper dis-semination of information to all citizens, but feedback from the latter is still negative regarding the effects.
Municipal elections scheduled for spring 2009 offer a unique possibility to enhance awareness of current reforms, and to create conditions for an open debate - including all interested citizens - on the future of decentralization.
It is desirable that such issues are inserted into political programs presented to voters before elections.
Local governance proved to be a remarkable tool for the implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreements.
The existing network of municipal Committees for Inter Com-munity Relations in all municipalities legally required to establish them is a promis-ing sign for the cohabitation of different communities at the local level.
Municipalities need to be supported – by national and international stakeholders -in implementing all legal requirements deriving from the Ohrid Framework Agreement.
Finally, this re-port shares the views on decentralization contained in the 2008 European Commission progress report.
Reform should be directed towards further strengthening municipal administrative capacities, particularly in the fields of education and social inclusion, solving the ownership/management of state-owned properties, continuous guidance of the decentralization process by the central government and especially by the Min-istry of Local Self Government.
These are among the priorities to be tackled in the coming months.
References
1. Law on Culture, Official Gazette of R.M. No. 66/2003
2. Law on Local Self-government, Official Gazette of R.M. No. 05/2002
3. Remsay, M. Community, culture and economic development, Albany, NY State University of New York Press
4. Ananiev, Jovan (May 2008) ‘Updated Brochure on Education and Decentralization: What Stakeholders really know and think about their Roles, Responsibilities And Rights
5. Levitas, Tony (2002), ‘Preparing for Education Decentralization in Macedonia: Is-sues, Directions, Actions, Macedonian Local Government Reform Project (USAID/DAI)
6. Law on Secondary Education, Official Gazette of R.M. No. 44/95, 24/96, 34/96, 35/97, 82/99, 29/2002, 40/2003, 42/2003, 67/2004 and 55/2005, 113/2005, 35/2006, 49/2007, 30/2007
7. Law on Primary Education, published in the Official Gazette of R.M. No. 44/95, 24/96, 34/96, 35/97, 82/99, 29/2002, 40/2003, 42/2003, 63/2004, 82/2004 and 55/2005, 35/2006, 70/2006
8. Enterprises and its Management: New Opportunities and Unresolved Challenges Publication based on Expert Group Meeting: Re-inventing Public Enterprises and its Management, 27-28 October 2005 New York, by Department of Economic and Social Affairs Division for Public Administration and Development Management; ST/ESA/PAD/SER.E/69
9. Methodology Used for Setting the Price of Potable Water and Removal of Waste Water from Urban Areas, prescribed by the Ministry of Transport and Communica-tion. Official gazette 68/04
10. Law for amendment and change of the Law for Public Enterprises, Official Gazette of R.M. No. 49/2006
11. ADKOM - Association of Public Service Providers in Macedonia http://www.ad-kom.org.mk, +389 2 2461-971
12. www.worldbank.org.mk - Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia : Issues in ur-ban and municipal development - a policy note, 01/11/200675 Survey on Decentralization 2008
13. OSCE survey on the status of the process of decentralization July 2006, July 2007
14. UNDP Citizens Centered Analysis 2007
15. LGI Study, Talk is Cheap, Turning Local Economic Development Strategies into Re-ality in Transition Countries
16. Socio-economic disparities among municipalities in Macedonia, UNDP report
17. Blue Ribbon report, UNDP
18. Law on Balanced Regional Development, Official Gazette of R.M. No. 07/2007
19. Meetings with GTZ Consultant / Expert on equal regional development.
20. Law on Financing the Units of Local Self Government, Official Gazette of R.M. No.61/2004
21. Law on Amending and Supplementing the Law on Budgets, Official Gazette of R.M. No. 4/08, 103/08
22. Law on Property Taxes (Official Gazette No. 92/07)
23. Law on Construction Land (Official Gazette No. 82/08)
24. Law for Amending and Supplementing the Law on Construction, Official Gazette of R.M. No. 82/08
25. G. Brosio, D.Jones, M. Nikolov (July 2008): “Technical Assistance to the Ministry of Finance for the Estimation of the Costs of the Transferred Competences to the Lo-cal Self-Government Units”
26. Urban Rural Consulting (2007): “Report for the process of fiscal decentralisation in Macedonia”
27. http://www.finance.gov.mk/mk/mp/godisen_07_mak_web.pdf
28. ZELS Newsletter July 2008
29. J.Martinez – Vasquez, A.Timofeev, N. Feruglio (2007): Fiscal Decentralization in FYR Macedonia: An Assessment
30. Law on Spatial and Urban Planning, Official Gazette of R.M. No. 51/2005
31. Law on Building Land, Official Gazette of R.M. No. 53/2001, 97/200176 Survey on Decentralization 2008
32. Law on General Administrative Procedure, Official Gazette of R.M. No. 38/05, 110/08
33. The Vienna Declaration on Informal Settlements in South Eastern Europe, Ministe-rial Conference on Informal Settlements in South Eastern Europe, OSCE Hofburg in Vienna, 28 September – 01 October 2004
34. Robin Richards, Brian O’Leary and Kingstone Mutsonziwa; Social Indicators Re-search (2006) - Measuring Quality if Life in Informal Settlements in South Africa. DOI 10.1007/s11205-006-9014-1
35. European Commission, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 2008 Progress Report
OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
Election Observation Mission
2011 Early Parliamentary Elections
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
INTERIM REPORT No. 1
6 May – 15 May
20 May 2011
I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Parliament voted to dissolve itself on 15 April 2011 and early parliamentary elections were called for 5 June.
A total of 123 Members of Parliament (MPs) will be elected including, for the first time, one MP from each of the three newly established out-of-country districts.
These are the first elections to be conducted since the Electoral Code was significantly amended in April 2011.
The amendments address several recommendations previously offered by OSCE/ODIHR, however, a number of concerns remain unaddressed.
Sixteen political parties and two coalitions will compete in these elections.
Candidate lists from one party and from one group of voters were denied registration by the State Election Commission (SEC).
The pre-campaign period has been tense and marked by strident rhetoric with the two coalitions accusing each other of voter intimidation.
The official 20-day election campaign begins on 16 May.
Several parties have already started to actively promote themselves through newspaper advertisements, billboards and distribution of campaign material.
The SEC announced that they would consider the issue of early campaigning only if they receive complaints from electoral contestants.
At the time of reporting, no complaints had been submitted.
The final number of registered voters is 1,821,122, including 7,258 registered for out-of-country voting.
The voter lists were posted for public scrutiny between 25 April and 4 May and 18,662 voters checked their records at local offices, through an internet-based search programme, and by emailing a dedicated office at the SEC.
The elections are administered by a three-tiered election administration, including the SEC, 84 Municipal Election Commissions and 2,976 Election Boards (EBs).
For the first time, an additional 36 EBs will be located in diplomatic and consular offices abroad to facilitate out-of-country voting.
The SEC sessions are open to observers, the media, and the public.
Those observed by the OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation Mission (EOM) were highly politicized.
Discussion and voting were strictly along party lines, particularly when the media were present.
In the absence of the media the SEC deliberations were more relaxed and consensual.
A large number of media outlets exist in the country and television is the main source for political information.
The Broadcasting Council has adopted rulebooks that regulate the coverage of the campaign period and, for the first time, the pre-campaign period.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM commenced its activities in Skopje on 6 May, with a 12-member core team.
On 9 May, 20 long-term observers were deployed throughout the country.
II. INTRODUCTION
Parliament voted to dissolve itself on 15 April 2011 and early parliamentary elections were called for 5 June.
In anticipation of an official invitation from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA), the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) sent a Needs Assessment Mission (NAM) to Skopje from 5 to 7 April.
Based on the recommendation of the OSCE/ODIHR NAM, and following the receipt of an invitation from the MFA an Election Observation Mission (EOM) was established on 6 May.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM, headed by Mr. Julian Peel Yates, consists of a 12-member core team based in Skopje and 20 long-term observers deployed in 10 locations throughout the country.
OSCE/ODIHR has requested participating States to second 300 short-term observers to follow election day procedures.
OSCE/ODIHR has previously observed 11 elections in the country.
III. POLITICAL CONTEXT
The 5 June elections will be the second consecutive early parliamentary elections.
They were called after a protracted boycott of parliament by the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM) and several other opposition parties.
The boycott started on 28 January in response to the freezing of bank accounts of four media outlets as a part of a criminal investigation linked to the owner of A1 Television.
In the last parliamentary elections, held on 1 June 2008, 63 mandates were won by the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization – Democratic Party of Macedonian National Unity (VMRO-DPNME)-led coalition, 27 by the Sun coalition led by SDSM, 18 by the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI), 11 by the Democratic Party of the Albanians (DPA) and 1 by the Party for European Future (PEI).
A government coalition was subsequently formed by the VMRO-DPMNE coalition, with DUI and PEI.
IV. LEGAL FRAMEWORK AND ELECTION SYSYTEM
The Electoral Code is the primary law which regulates parliamentary elections.
It was amended in April 2011 by a slim majority, with opposition parties boycotting the vote.
As most electoral deadlines have been shortened by five days for early elections, questions have been raised whether the necessary preparations and information outreach to electoral stakeholders can be implemented within this timeframe.
The revised Electoral Code addresses several recommendations previously offered by OSCE/ODIHR.
However, a number of concerns remain unaddressed, including: a short timeframe for the courts and election administration bodies to hear and decide on complaints; a prohibition on submitting complaints by post; a lack of clarity on the resumption of candidacy rights for those who have served the penalty for a committed crime; and a revised ceiling on donations from corporations for campaign funding.
A total of 123 Members of Parliament (MPs) will be elected to serve four-year terms.
120 MPs will be elected under a proportional representation system from six electoral districts, and, for the first time, one MP will be elected under a majoritarian system from each of the three new out-of-country districts of Europe and Africa, North and South America, and Australia and Asia.
The transparency of campaign finance has been enhanced by a requirement for parties to submit interim reports on their campaign expenditures to the State Election Commission (SEC), State Audit Office and the State Commission for Prevention of Corruption.
The reports are then required to be published on the websites of these institutions.
However, no deadlines are envisaged for verifying reports submitted prior to election day.
V. ELECTION ADMINISTRATION
The Electoral Code foresees a three-tiered election administration including the SEC, 84 Municipal Election Commissions (MECs), 2,976 in-country Election Boards (EBs), and up to 50 out-of-country EBs located in diplomatic and consular offices abroad.
The SEC is a permanent body appointed for a four-year mandate by parliament.
It consists of seven members and oversees the general preparations for elections.
The SEC President and two members are nominated by the parliamentary opposition parties while the Vice President and three members are nominated by the governing parties.
The current SEC was appointed in 2008, however, the President resigned on 23 February 2011 and parliament elected a successor on 12 April.
The SEC sessions are open to international and domestic observers from civil society, and the media.
The SEC sessions observed thus far have been highly politicized.
Discussions and voting were strictly along party lines, particularly when the media were present.
In the absence of the media, the SEC deliberations were more relaxed and consensual.
MECs are responsible for overseeing the election process in each municipality.
MECs are professional bodies of five members, and are randomly selected from civil servants and public service employees.
All MEC members were newly appointed on 26 April to serve a five-year mandate.
EBs are responsible for particular polling stations prior to and on election day.
EBs are composed using a mixed professional-political model, with one member nominated by the governing political parties, one by the opposition parties, and three members randomly selected from public service employees.
All lower-level election bodies followed the principle of “adequate and equitable” representation of ethnic groups and gender.
However, the SEC has only one woman member.
The SEC has instituted a compulsory training program for the lower-level election commissions which began on 4 May and included the EBs for the out-of-country polling stations.
VI. VOTER LISTS
The responsibility for updating and maintaining the voter lists lies with the SEC.
The public inspection of extracts of the voter lists took place between 25 April and 4 May.
The extracts were available for inspection at the SEC regional and local offices through an internet-based search programme, and by emailing a dedicated office at the SEC.
According to information published on the SEC website 18,662 people checked their data during this period out of whom 42 people were newly registered, 756 deceased were deleted ex officio,8 6 deceased were deleted at the request of citizens, 210 changes to personal data were requested by citizens, and 24 persons applied to be registered but were rejected.
The SEC announced on 15 May that the final voter lists for the 2011 parliamentary elections contain 1,821,122 voters, some 29,000 more than the 2009 presidential and municipal elections.
A total of 7,258 people registered for out-of-country voting.
4,653 in electoral district seven which covers Europe and Africa, 1,832 in electoral district eight which covers North and South America and 773 in electoral district nine which covers Australia and Asia.
VII. CONTESTANTS AND CAMPAIGN ENVIRONMENT
Parliamentary elections may be contested by candidates nominated by political parties, coalitions of political parties, or by independent candidates nominated by groups of voters.
Two large coalitions, one led by SDSM and one by VMRO-DPMNE,10 as well as sixteen political parties submitted candidate lists to the SEC by the 5 May deadline and will compete in these elections.
Candidate lists from one party and one group of citizens were denied registration by the SEC.
Even though the official campaign period does not start until 16 May, the political climate has been somewhat fractious and strident rhetoric has been used, particularly by the VMRO-DPMNE and SDSM led coalitions, which accused each other of unlawful behaviour in an attempt to influence voters’ freedom of choice.
There have been widespread allegations of threats of loss of employment made against civil servants if they do not secure a certain number of votes for the ruling coalition.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM has received documents from several sources concerning these allegations.
Both parties have publicized documents containing lists of names of people allegedly pressured to vote for the opponent.
VMRO-DPMNE has announced that it will file lawsuits against A1 Television for broadcasting a news item about alleged intimidation, as well as against SDSM for allegedly bribing voters.
The atmosphere appears to be calmer in the ethnic Albanian political arena.
The two traditional rivals, DUI and DPA signed an Electoral Pact on 4 May committing to a democratic election process, to refrain from hate speech, insults and provocations, and to recognize the election results.
Two new ethnic Albanian political parties, New Democracy (ND) and the National Democratic Renewal (NDR), are running for the first time.
On 12 May all political parties signed a Code of Conduct.
The signatories committed themselves to promote democratic elections, a climate of tolerance, and to publicly condemn violence and intimidation.
Several parties have already started actively promoting themselves before the official start of the campaign.
Instances of early campaigning include paid double-page advertisements in several newspapers, links on newspapers’ websites to campaign videos posted on the internet, and the distribution of campaign material.
Billboards have also appeared in Skopje, some declaring “Are You for Victory” with a circled yes12 and others supporting specific political parties.
The SEC announced that they would consider the issue of early campaigning only if they receive complaints from electoral contestants.
So far, the SEC has received no complaints in this regard.
VIII. THE MEDIA
A large number of media outlets exist in the country, including 14 national, 12 satellite and 130 regional TV and radio stations as well as 10 daily newspapers.
Television remains the main source for political information, while national broadcasters dominate the advertising market.
The coverage of the election campaign is regulated by the Electoral Code and the Law on Broadcasting Activity.
In addition, the Broadcasting Council (BC) adopted one rulebook regulating the coverage of the campaign period and, for the first time, one rulebook regulating the pre-campaign period.
The BC oversees compliance of the broadcast media with the legislation and rulebooks.
Since 15 April the body has been monitoring 16 national broadcast media outlets.
With the official start of the campaign on 16 May the BC intends to monitor 154 broadcast media outlets.
During the reporting period the BC initiated misdemeanour procedures against Kanal 5 and A1 Television for not supplying all necessary information when publishing the results of public opinion polls, and against TV Alb for airing paid political advertisements before the official start of the campaign period.
In addition, notifications were sent to four media outlets (MTV 1, Kanal 5, A1 Television, and Radio Metropolis) stating that the publication of advertisements paid by state institutions are prohibited after the announcement of the elections.
Article 76(a) of the Electoral Code requires the Public Broadcaster, Macedonian Radio and Television (MRT), to allocate free airtime to all candidates.
On 10 May, MRT decided to allocate to each electoral contestant three minutes per electoral district in which the party/coalition is running.
The law does not stipulate the time during which the free time should be allocated.
MRT decided to allocate time between 16.00 and 16.30, clearly outside of prime time viewing.
In addition, MRT is planning to organize 14 90-minute debates between electoral contestants.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM’s media monitoring is conducted in two time periods: the first from 9 May to 15 May, covering the period before the official campaign begins.
The second will cover the official campaign period from 16 May to 3 June.
The media monitoring consists of quantitative and qualitative analysis of the prime time broadcasts of two public and five private TV channels, as well as five daily newspapers.
IX. COMPLAINTS AND APPEALS
The Electoral Code provides for various legal avenues for protecting electoral rights, including appeals on voter registration issues, appeals against denial of registration, complaints concerning campaign offences and election results.
All of these fall under the jurisdiction of different appeal bodies.
The SEC is the competent body to deal with complaints from candidates and voters regarding election procedures.
SEC decisions can be appealed to the Administrative Court.
Complaints on campaign irregularities must be submitted to Basic Courts, whose decisions can be appealed to the Court of Appeals.
Criminal complaints are also filed in the Basic Courts and can be appealed to the Court of Appeals.
A further appeal can be taken to the Supreme Court, as the last instance.
The State Prosecutor is mandated to launch a criminal investigation whenever he is notified of an electoral offence.
At the time of reporting, no formal complaints have been lodged regarding voter lists or candidate registration.
On 11 May, the State Prosecutor launched an investigation into an alleged case of voter intimidation by VMRO-DPMNE, as reported in the media.
The State Prosecutor informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that the case would be handled as an urgent procedure and be resolved before election day.
X. OSCE/ODIHR EOM ACTIVITIES
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM commenced its activities in Skopje on 6 May, with a 12-member core team.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM has so far met the Prime Minister, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the leaders of all main political parties, media, domestic observer groups, the Acting Head of the OSCE Mission to Skopje, and ambassadors of OSCE participating States.
A first briefing for the diplomatic community will be held on 16 May.
The OSCE Parliamentary Assembly (OSCE PA) and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe will deploy observer delegations for election-day observation.
The OSCE Chairperson-in-Office has appointed Mr. Roberto Battelli, OSCE PA Treasurer and Special Representative on South East Europe, as Special Co-ordinator to lead the OSCE short-term observer mission for these elections.
OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
Election Observation Mission
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Municipal Elections, 15 October 2017
INTERIM REPORT
13 September – 29 September 2017
6 October 2017
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The government was formed with a six-month delay after the last early parliamentary elections, resulting in the postponement of municipal elections.
In July, the government introduced a plan to address the misuse of administrative resources, pressure on public employees, unbalanced media coverage and to improve transparency of the election administration.
The  electoral  legal  framework  was  substantially  revised  in  2016.
Further  changes  in  2017 amended the timing for the municipal elections and authorized the parliament to change the composition of the State Election Commission (SEC).
SEC sessions are public; however, some decisions so far have been made in closed sessions and observers have not always been informed in advance.
Most Municipal Election Commissions (MECs) are operational and preparations are underway, but some reported a lack of adequate premises and material.
To ensure voting rights for persons with disabilities, the SEC has mapped polling stations that are wheelchair accessible and plans to provide all voting locations with a tactile ballot sleeve.
The voter education campaign is yet to begin.
A total of 1,814,644 voters are registered for the elections.
The online and in-person verification of voter lists resulted in a small number of changes.
As a result, some OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors acknowledged growing confidence in the accuracy of the voter register, while others continued to express concern over its precision.
MECs registered 19 parties and coalitions and 65 groups of voters, for a total of 258 mayoral candidates and 369 lists for municipal councils.
Six per cent of mayoral candidates are women and 14 per cent of council lists are headed by women.
Candidates and lists tend to reflect the ethnic composition of the respective municipality.
The campaign period started on 25 September.
Contestants publicly committed themselves to an unprovocative conduct of the campaign, while the government pledged to respect the separation of the state and party.
Electoral contestants are using a range of outreach tools, including online media.
Some  isolated,  politically  motivated  incidents  have  occurred,  including  damage  to campaign offices.
The legal framework limits donations and sets a ceiling on campaign spending per registered voter.
While two interim campaign finance reports will be published prior to election day, no verification of income or expenditure will be conducted until after the elections.
The public media’s coverage of the elections is strictly regulated as are political advertisements in commercial media.
Public media are required to provide equitable news coverage of electoral contestants and grant access to free airtime.
Media compliance with the legal requirements is monitored by the Agency for Audio and Audiovisual Media Services.
On 21 September, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM began qualitative and quantitative media monitoring.
A range of electoral offences are under the jurisdiction of the SEC and courts, while the State Commission for Prevention of Corruption reviews complaints pertaining to the separation of party and state and the misuse of administrative resources during the campaign.
The legislation foresees citizen and international observers’ access to all stages of the electoral process.
So far, four civil society organizations have been accredited to observe the elections.
INTRODUCTION
Following an invitation from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) established an Election Observation Mission (EOM) to observe the 15 October municipal elections.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM, headed by Ambassador Audrey Glover, comprises a 17-member core team based in Skopje and 20 long-term observers deployed  across  the  country.
Mission  members  are  drawn  from  22  OSCE  participating  States.
Participating States have been requested to second 300 short-term observers to observe election day procedures.
POLITICAL BACKGROUND
After the 2016 early parliamentary elections, the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization – Democratic  Party  for  National  Unity  (VMRO-DPMNE)  did  not  reach  an  agreement  with  its traditional coalition partner, the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI).
Instead, the DUI and other ethnic Albanian parties aligned with the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM), yet the president  did  not  give  them  a  mandate  to  form  the  government.
On  27  April,  after  several unsuccessful  attempts,  the  speaker  of  the  parliament  was  elected.
This  development  triggered  a confrontation in the parliament, resulting in an assault on its members, including ones from the SDSM and the Alliance of Albanians (AoA).
The political crisis de-escalated only after the president gave a mandate to the SDSM to form the government, which was established on 31 May, following a six-month delay.
This resulted in the postponement of the municipal elections.
In July, the government introduced a plan to address the misuse of administrative resources, pressure on public employees, unbalanced media coverage and to improve the transparency of the election administration.
The  country’s  long-standing  aspirations  for  European  Union  (EU)  and  NATO integration, the continuously high unemployment rate and high emigration form the backdrop to these elections.
OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors estimate that the conduct of the municipal elections may impact the ongoing integration processes and see it as a test of the new government’s credibility.
Currently, 55 of 80 municipalities are governed by the VMRO-DPMNE, while the SDSM has 4 of 81 party-affiliated mayors.
LEGAL FRAMEWORK AND ELECTORAL SYSTEM
The  amended  1991  Constitution  establishes  a  full  range  of  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms.
Municipal elections are primarily governed by the Constitution and Electoral Code (EC).
Regulations adopted by the State Election Commission (SEC) supplement the EC; they should not contradict the legislation, but are not subject to judicial review.
As noted in the 2016 OSCE/ODIHR and Council of Europe’s Venice Commission Joint Opinion on the  Electoral  Code,  the  legal  framework  provides  a  sound  basis  for  the  conduct  of  democratic elections,  if  properly  implemented.
However,  gaps  and  ambiguities,  including  some  noted  in previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, remain.
The EC was adopted in 2006 and has since been substantively amended, most recently in 2016.
In addition, in 2017, several key amendments were introduced: the timing of municipal elections was changed from May to October, the Constitutional Court annulled some provisions aimed at preserving the separation of state and party, and the parliament was authorized to change the SEC composition to reflect the current composition of parliament.
Municipal elections are held every four years to elect mayors and councils in 80 municipalities and the City of Skopje.
Councillors are elected by proportional representation through closed candidate lists.
Seats  are  allocated  using  the  d’Hondt  formula.
Mayors  are  elected  through  a  two-round majoritarian system.
If no mayoral candidate receives more than 50 per cent of the votes cast in the first round, a runoff would be held on 29 October.
For the first round of mayoral elections, a one-third voter turnout is required; otherwise, the election is repeated for the corresponding municipality.
There is no turnout requirement for a runoff.
ELECTION ADMINISTRATION
Municipal elections are administered by three-levels of election administration, comprising the SEC, 80 Municipal Election Commissions (MECs) and the Election Commission for the City of Skopje, and  3,480  Election  Boards  (EBs).
Requirements  for  ethnic  and  gender  balance  in  the  election administration are set out in the EC.
The SEC is comprised of nine members, three of whom are women.
By law, three SEC members have no political affiliation, and are selected through open recruitment.
The other six members reflect the political composition of the parliament.
The non-partisan members’ five-year tenure is protected, while  party  nominees,  following  2017  amendments  to  the  EC,  must  be  changed  to  align  the composition of the SEC to the current parliament.
Accordingly, on 22 September, a Movement BESA member replaced the sitting Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) member.
One SEC member is under indictment in a case relating to misuse of office during municipal elections in 2013.
MECs comprise five members, randomly selected from among municipal-level civil servants.
EBs are composed of two political appointees and three non-partisan members.
The selection and appointment of EBs has not yet been finalised due to a range of reasons, including the right of those selected to refuse duty.
Thirteen MECs do not meet the gender quota.
Municipal governments are responsible for financing elections.
Municipalities, whose accounts are blocked by a court decision due to unpaid debts, are to receive funding from the state budget.
The Ministry of Finance has already allocated MKD 30 million for 17 such municipalities.
Some MECs reported  to  the  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  that  despite  financing,  they  lack  adequate  premises  and material.
By law, the election administration is required to make its work public and the SEC has to publish minutes of its sessions within 48 hours of adoption.
While SEC official sessions are open to observers and media, some decisions so far have been made in closed sessions and observers were not always informed in advance.
Also, some regulations, decisions and guidelines are not published online.
MECs are not required to publish session minutes, but some do voluntarily.
From July to September, the SEC, in co-operation with civil society, assessed the accessibility of polling stations for persons with disabilities, which can be checked online.
The SEC is planning to produce braille ballot sleeves for each polling station.
The SEC plans to conduct a voter education and information campaign, which has yet to get started.
VOTER REGISTRATION
All  citizens  who  reached  the  age  of  18  have  the  right  to  vote,  except  those  declared  legally incapacitated by a court decision.
In addition, only persons with a registered address and a valid identification card or a biometric passport are included in the voter register.
The SEC maintains the voter register based on data extracted from civil and population registers.
Four times a year, it updates the voter register based on data provided by various state agencies.
The day after an election is called, a supplementary update is conducted.
The SEC has the right to conduct random  direct  inspections  for  accuracy.
For  these  elections,  the  SEC  did  not  undertake comprehensive verification of the voter register.
Public scrutiny of voter lists for municipal elections took place from 21 August until 9 September.
During this period, more than 220,000 voters checked their data and only 237 requested corrections.
As a result of a small number of changes, some OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors acknowledged growing confidence in the accuracy of the voter register, while others continued to express concern over its precision.
On 16 September, two days after the legal deadline, parties received a copy of the lists.
After verification, five parties requested inclusion of or deletion of a total of 49 voters.
While requests for inclusion were accepted, those for deletion were rejected by the SEC, as such changes fall under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Interior.
On 25 September, a day after the deadline, the SEC approved final lists containing 1,814,644 voters, including 1,882 voters in penitentiary institutions.
The EC does not allow a voter to change polling stations, thus a special provision is made for election commissioners and police deployed on election day, enabling them to vote.
Homebound voters, who place a request with a MEC by 8 October, will be able to vote by mobile ballot box on 14 October.
CANDIDATE REGISTRATION
Any eligible voter residing in the municipality where she/he wishes to contest may stand for election, except those currently in prison or waiting to serve a prison term of more than six months.
Parties, coalitions and groups of voters have the right to nominate candidates for these elections.
The latter are required to support a nomination with signatures of 0.2 to 4 per cent of eligible voters residing in the respective municipality.
Signatures should be collected in front of the SEC representative at SEC regional offices.
A voter may sign in support of more than one list.
Candidate registration ended on 14 September, resulting in 19 parties and coalitions, and 65 groups of voters fielding a total of 369 candidate lists.
Mayoral posts will be contested by 258 candidates, of whom 20 are independent.
Two different political entities, a party and a coalition, with the same name, Alliance for Albanians, will stand against each other.
A complaint by the coalition on this matter was rejected.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM is aware of five rejections of candidate lists, which were all appealed to and dismissed  by  the  Administrative  Court  (four  in  closed  sessions).
Three  of  these  lists  were  de-registered by the MECs because a dedicated bank account was not opened within the legal deadline.
To enhance gender equality, the EC requires candidate lists to include not less than 40 per cent of the less represented gender.
Of the 258 mayoral candidates, 16 are women; 52 of 369 lists are headed by women.
On 17 September, after the nomination deadline, the SEC amended a regulation detailing how the gender quota should be applied.
CAMPAIGN ENVIRONMENT
The official campaign commenced on 25 September and will end at midnight on 13 October.
The EC  comprehensively  regulates  campaigning  and  generally  provides  for  a  level  playing  field.
Furthermore, the law aims to protect voters from undue pressure and various restrictions aim to uphold a separation of state and party, as well as preventing a misuse of administrative resources.
Local governments play an important role in the campaign by allocating space for outdoor advertising.
On 5 September, the government adopted a Declaration on Free and Fair Elections, calling on public and state officials to refrain from fraudulent activities and respect voters’ right to choose freely.
On 19 September, the government adopted several laws on financial and social issues.
On 24 September at the SEC and MECs, mayoral candidates signed a code of conduct pledging to uphold the law.
The pre-campaign environment was calm with a few isolated incidents.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM observed instances of early campaigning by several parties.
A number of OSCE/ODIHR EOM stakeholders  raised  concerns  of  potential  vote-buying,  intimidation  and  the  use  of  government resources for campaigning.
Recently, charges were laid against two incumbent mayors for abuse of office, including election-related offenses.
The  campaign  commenced  with  festive  rallies,  where  party  leaders  presented  their  candidates, unveiled campaign slogans and outlined policy platforms.
Although parties campaign on municipal issues, platforms reflect national agendas.
From 25 September, large billboards appeared in urban centres, predominantly featuring mayoral candidates.
In some cities, parties opened temporary offices.
Contestants plan to purchase advertisements on TV and in print media and increase their support base through social media.
CAMPAIGN FINANCE
Campaigns are financed by donations and party membership fees.
Public, foreign and anonymous donations are prohibited.
Donations are limited to EUR 3,000 (individuals) and EUR 30,000 (legal entities), including in-kind contributions.
Expenses are partly reimbursed by the local administration for lists that receive at least 1.5 per cent of all votes cast in a municipality (EUR 0.24 per vote).
All campaign transactions should be administered through a dedicated bank account.
The campaign spending limit is EUR 1.8 per registered voter in a municipality, per round.
The State Audit Office (SAO) exercises control and handles complaints on campaign finance.
It is to receive and publish two interim campaign finance reports from each list submitter but is not required to audit them.
Only final reports that contestants must file up to four months after the elections are to be audited.
The SAO informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that it does not necessarily audit all reports received.
Sanctions for violations include cancellation of reimbursements and strict criminal penalties depending on the violation.
On 1 September, the Ministry of Finance issued a new reporting template that requires comprehensive information about all donors and, in line with a previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendation, a detailed breakdown of donations and expenditures.
The current template does not have expenses broken down by municipality.
Regional party branches informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that campaigns will be financed mainly by funds raised locally; parliamentary parties also plan a centralized disbursement of funds and campaign goods.
Smaller parties and independent candidates complained to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM about a lack of financing.
MEDIA
A large number of media outlets, largely divided along political lines, operate in a small advertisement market.
Television is the main source of information; the circulation of newspapers is rather low, while growing Internet penetration has led to a significant development of online news sites.
On 19 September,  the  parliament  abolished  the  broadcasting  fee  for  financing  the  public  broadcaster Macedonian  Radio  Television  (MRT),  the  Agency  for  Audio  and  Audiovisual  Media  Services (AVMS) and the Macedonian Broadcasting (MRD).
From 1 October, these institutions will be funded only from the state budget.
OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors noted concern that such funding limits may hinder the AVMS and further weaken the MRT as a public broadcaster due to possible political interference.
The Constitution guarantees the freedom of expression and prohibits censorship.
The EC requires all media outlets to cover the elections in a fair, balanced and unbiased manner, including on their websites.
The MRT is required to provide political contestants with free airtime during primetime.
There will be no lottery on the allocation of slots; the order will be determined based on candidate requests.
The MRT’s news coverage of elections is strictly regulated as is the placement of paid advertisement in the commercial media.
Media compliance with the legal requirements is monitored by the AVMS.
The AVMS may apply sanctions in a case of violation and refer the matter to the relevant court.
Since 7 August, the AVMS has conducted systematic media monitoring and publishes results on its website every 10 days.
So far, the AVMS notes that the main media outlets provide more balanced coverage than in past elections.
Several national media outlets actively organize debates among mayoral candidates in their respective municipalities.
Lively  discussions  between  candidates  and  supporters  are  taking  place  on  social media.
On 21 September, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM commenced its quantitative and qualitative media monitoring of election-related coverage of six main television channels and four daily newspapers.
COMPLAINTS AND APPEALS
The SEC, independent administrative bodies and courts are responsible for adjudicating election-related cases.
Concerns have been raised by a number of OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors about alleged lack of impartiality of the SEC and courts dealing with politically sensitive cases.
Parties can appeal MEC decisions that reject candidate lists in the Administrative Court; other MEC decisions and actions, however, are not subject to SEC or to judicial review.
Voters can only lodge complaints to the SEC on voter lists and violation of their right to vote.
Political entities can only challenge voter lists, voting and counting irregularities.
While SEC decisions on complaints and annulment of results are reviewable by the Administrative Court, other administrative decisions and actions are not subject to judicial review.
Complaints on campaign violations are not under the SEC’s mandate, and are considered criminal or civil matters.
Disputes concerning actions of government and public entities that breach provisions aimed at a separation of state and party and to prevent the use of public resources for campaigning, are under the jurisdiction of the State Commission for Prevention of Corruption (SCPC).
The SCPC has received some 15 complaints against public entities for the termination of employment of public officials in the election period.
PARTICIPATION OF NATIONAL MINORITIES
Interethnic  relations  play  a  role  in  elections,  especially  at  the  local  level.
Matters  relevant  to intercommunity relations, such as the draft law on the use of languages, feature in the campaign alongside  specific  local  issues.
Candidates  and  lists  tend to  reflect  the  ethnic  composition  of  a municipality.
In several cases, however, candidates sought votes from across ethnic boundaries.
In municipalities with an ethnic Albanian majority, several ethnic Albanian parties that are part of the government are competing against each other.
Parties representing smaller ethnic communities field mayoral candidates in only a few cases where such ethnic groups are concentrated in one municipality, such as ethnic Turks in Centar Zhupa and the Roma in Shuto Orizari.
In other localities, they present lists of candidates for municipal councils.
Parties from smaller communities complained to the OSCE/ODHIR EOM of not having a SEC member and that they are underrepresented in the local election administration.
CITIZEN AND INTERNATIONAL OBSERVERS
The EC foresees citizen and international observer access to all stages of the electoral process.
The SEC has so far accredited four citizen observer organizations, which will assess the work of the election administration and deploy a considerable number of observers on election day.
Electoral contestants can also accredit their representatives.
Unlike citizen observers, partisan observers can submit complaints at all stages of the electoral process.
OSCE/ODIHR EOM ACTIVITIES
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM commenced its work on 13 September, and has met the President, the Prime Minister, the SEC, other state agencies as well as representatives of political parties, media, civil society,  the  OSCE  Mission  to  Skopje  and  international  community.
The  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM established contacts with electoral stakeholders at all levels.
The Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe intends to deploy a delegation for election day observation.
INTERNATIONAL ELECTION OBSERVATION MISSION
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Municipal Elections, 15 October 2017
STATEMENT OF PRELIMINARY FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
PRELIMINARY CONCLUSIONS
The holding of the 15 October municipal elections contributed to strengthening confidence in the democratic process.
Elections were held in a competitive environment with candidates generally able to campaign without restriction and fundamental freedoms were overall respected.
However, credible allegations of vote-buying, pressure on voters and isolated cases of violence occurred during the pre-election period.
Overall, monitored media provided unbiased coverage of contestants and facilitated the opportunity for political debate.
Despite organizational challenges, the election administration ensured that voters were able to exercise their voting rights.
Election day generally proceeded orderly, although some procedural irregularities were observed.
The legal framework provides for fundamental rights and freedoms, including the protection of minority rights, and forms a sound basis for the conduct of democratic elections.
While amendments in recent years addressed a number of prior OSCE/ODIHR and Council of Europe recommendations, shortcomings remain, including restrictions on independent candidate registration and limited rights for legal redress.
A late revision of the Electoral Code that resulted in a change to the composition of the State Election Commission (SEC) is at odds with international good practice.
Overall, while the SEC was able to administer the elections, its discussions on politically contentious issues and unnecessary involvement in the operational work of its secretariat at times resulted in missed deadlines.
This delayed the SEC’s comprehensive voter education campaign.
Some SEC regulations  contradicted  the  legislation.
SEC  sessions  were  open  to  observers,  yet  frequently substantive decisions were made in closed meetings.
Only a few mid-level commissions undertook initiatives to enhance transparency of their work.
Positively, steps to facilitate voting rights for persons with disabilities were introduced.
A total of 1,814,644 voters were registered for the elections.
During online and in-person verification of voter lists, only a small number of changes was requested.
As a result, many interlocutors of international observers acknowledged growing confidence in the integrity of the voter register, while some continued to express concern, including on the implementation of the residency requirement.
Following an inclusive registration process, 19 political parties and coalitions and 65 groups of voters fielded a total of 258 mayoral candidates and 370 candidate lists for council elections.
Voters were offered a range of choices, and highly-contested races took place in many municipalities.
The SEC composition met with the 30 per cent gender representation requirement in the election administration.
However, it was not always respected at lower levels.
Not all candidate lists complied with  the  legal  requirements  for  gender  balance,  yet  these  were  registered.
Issues  pertaining  to women’s participation in public life were not addressed in the campaign.
The legislation comprehensively regulates campaigning and generally provides for a level playing field.
The campaign took place in an environment where fundamental freedoms of assembly and expression  were  generally  respected.
However,  isolated  politically-motivated  incidents  occurred related  to  attacks  on  campaign  offices  and  violence  against  one  candidate.
The  larger  parties  campaigned on national matters of stability and integration, as well as issues of municipal services and infrastructure.
While  campaign  finance  regulations  have  improved  in  recent  years  in  line  with  previous recommendations,  they  did  not  fully  ensure  adequate  transparency  due  to  a  lack  of  auditing requirements for interim reports, as well as insufficient oversight authority of the State Audit Office.
Only a small portion of interim reports were submitted.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM media monitoring showed that the public media provided all contestants with free airtime during prime time, but only a small number of candidates used it.
The two larger parties dominated in paid advertising on private media.
TV debates were well organized; however, not all  invited  candidates  participated.
The  media  authority  responsible  for  ensuring  balanced  and unbiased election coverage, initiated six misdemeanour proceedings on media violations.
Interethnic relations played a role in the elections.
While some parties sought votes across ethnic lines, most  candidate  lists  reflected  the  ethnic  composition  of  a  particular  municipality.
Some confrontational campaigning was observed between candidates belonging to the same community.
The legal framework does not fully provide for effective legal redress in electoral disputes, contrary to OSCE commitments.
The SEC received few pre-election day complaints.
While concerns were raised on the misuse of administrative resources, vote-buying and pressure on voters, only a few complaints were filed with other authorities, some of which are under investigation.
A number of interlocutors informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM and the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe that they lacked trust in the ability of the election administration and courts to handle election-related cases impartially.
Citizen observer access to all stages of the process contributed to transparency and offered a non-partisan assessment of  the elections.
In total, 3,000 citizen observers  were accredited to  follow election day proceedings.
Early voting and election day progressed in an orderly manner in most parts of the country.
Polling staff  generally  efficiently  facilitated  voting  and  adhered  to  prescribed  procedures.
However, international  observers  noted  some  reoccurring  irregularities,  including  family/group  voting  and compromised  vote  secrecy.
During  tabulation,  most  MECs  followed  procedures.
In  14  MECs, observers did not have a sufficient view of the data entry process, which limited transparency.
The SEC started releasing preliminary results shortly after polls closed, which contributed to transparency; however, results were not disaggregated by polling station, limiting their scrutiny.
PRELIMINARY FINDINGS
Background
After  the  2016  early  parliamentary  elections,  the  formation  of  the  government  proved  to  be  a challenge.
The  Internal  Macedonian Revolutionary  Organization-Democratic Party for Macedonia National Unity (VMRO-DPMNE) failed to reach an agreement with its traditional coalition partner, the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI).
Instead, the DUI and other ethnic Albanian parties aligned with the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM), yet the president did not give them a mandate to form the government.
On 27 April, after several unsuccessful attempts, the speaker of the parliament was elected, which triggered a confrontation in the parliament and resulted in an assault on its members, including senior  members of the SDSM and Alliance for Albanians (AA).
The political crisis de-escalated only after the president gave a mandate to the SDSM to form the government, which was established on 31 May, following a six-month delay.
This delay resulted in the postponement of municipal elections.
In July, the government endorsed economic, judicial and political reforms, as well as a plan to address the misuse of administrative resources, pressure on public employees, unbalanced media coverage and lack of transparency of the election administration.
The  country’s  long  standing  aspirations  to  join  the  European  Union  (EU)  and  NATO,  the continuously high unemployment rate and high emigration formed the backdrop to these elections.
The conduct of municipal elections was perceived by most OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors as a test of the new government’s credibility, impacting the ongoing EU and NATO integration processes.
Currently, 55 of the 80 municipalities are governed by the VMRO-DPMNE, while the SDSM has 4 party-affiliated mayors.
Legal Framework and Electoral System
The elections are primarily governed by the 1991 Constitution and the 2006 Electoral Code (EC).
The Constitution establishes fundamental rights and freedoms, including the protection of minority rights, while the EC generally provides a sound basis for the conduct of democratic elections.
The EC has undergone a series of positive amendments since its adoption, of which many are in line with prior OSCE/ODIHR  and  Council  of  Europe’s  Commission  for  Democracy  through  Law  (Venice Commission) recommendations, particularly related to the separation of state and party, and campaign finance regulations.
However, shortcomings pertaining to a number of aspects of the legislation remain, including undue restrictions on independent candidate registration and limited rights for legal redress.
In 2017, two key amendments to the EC were introduced: the timing of municipal elections was changed from May to October, and the parliament was authorized to change the composition of the State  Election  Commission  (SEC).
SEC  regulations  supplement  various  aspects  of  the  election legislation.
However, some regulations were approved or amended late and some contradicted the legislation.
These combined factors challenged the integrity of the electoral process.
Municipal elections are held every four years to elect mayors and councils in 80 municipalities and the City of Skopje.
Councillors are elected by proportional representation through closed lists.
Mayors are  elected  through  a  two-round  majoritarian  system.
Runoffs  will  be  held  on  29  October  for municipalities in which no candidate received more than 50 per cent of the votes cast.
For mayoral elections, only the first round requires a one-third voter turnout.
Election Administration
The municipal elections were administered by a three-level election administration, comprising the SEC, 80 Municipal Election Commissions (MECs) and the Election Commission for the City of Skopje, and 3,480 Election Boards (EBs).
The SEC comprises nine members, three of whom are women.
By law, three SEC members have no political affiliation and are selected through open competition.
The other six reflect the political composition of the parliament.
The non-partisan members’ five-year tenure is reasonably protected, while party nominees, following the September amendment to the EC, must be changed to align the composition of the SEC to the current parliament.
Accordingly, on 22 September, a BESA member replaced the sitting Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) member.
Furthermore, one current SEC member is under indictment in a case relating to a misuse of office during municipal elections in 2013, thus compromising the public perception of the SEC.
MECs comprise five members, randomly selected from among municipal-level civil servants.
EBs are composed of two political appointees and three non-partisan members.
Some EB members were appointed late.
The SEC delivered three rounds of timely and consistent training to MEC members, who in turn trained the EBs.
Despite organizational challenges, the election administration generally ensured that voters had the opportunity to exercise their voting rights.
By law, the election administration is required to make its work public, while in practice, the SEC lacked genuine transparency.
SEC sessions were open to observers, yet frequently substantive decisions were made in closed meetings.
The publication of session minutes was delayed and not all SEC decisions, regulations and guidelines were available on its website.
In addition, the SEC’s discussions on politically contentious issues and unnecessary involvement in the operational work of its secretariat at times resulted in missed deadlines.
This also delayed the SEC’s comprehensive voter education campaign.
The level of transparency of MECs varied.
While most did not apply measures to enhance transparency, some took the initiative to increase trust in their work.
Local  governments  are  responsible  for  financing  elections.
Municipalities  whose  accounts  were blocked by a court decision due to unpaid debts received funding from the state budget.
At least 14 MECs lacked adequate premises and equipment, and faced further financial difficulties.
Despite these challenges, MECs generally worked in a professional manner.
The EC includes a 30 per cent gender representation criteria in the election administration, but this was  not  consistently  respected.
Thirteen  MECs  did  not  meet  the  gender  quota.
Although  not required by law, 28 per cent of MECs had a female president.
For the first time, to facilitate voting rights for persons with disabilities, the SEC, in co-operation with civil society, mapped polling stations that were wheelchair accessible and placed this information online.
It also produced Braille ballot sleeves for some polling stations.
Voter Registration
All citizens who reached the age of 18 years have the right to vote, except those declared legally incapacitated  by  a  court  decision.
Such  a  restriction  is  at  odds  with  OSCE  commitments  and international obligations.
Only persons with a registered address in the respective municipality and a valid identification card or a biometric passport are included in the voter register.
Voter registration is passive.
The SEC maintains the voter register based on data extracted from civil and population registers.
Four times a year, it updates the register based on data provided by various state agencies.
The day after an election is called, a supplementary update of the voter register is conducted.
The SEC has the right to undertake random inspections for accuracy.
For these elections, the SEC did not deem it necessary to undertake a comprehensive verification of the voter register.
During public scrutiny, more than 220,000 voters checked their data online and in-person, but only 230 requested corrections.
A limited number of changes were also requested by political parties.
As a result, many interlocutors of international observers acknowledged growing confidence in the integrity  of  the  voter  register,  while  some  continued  to  express  concern,  including  on  the implementation of the residency requirement.
A total of 1,814,644 voters were registered for these elections.
The SEC approved final voter lists on 25 September, a day after the official deadline.
Printed voter lists were sent to MECs, which were then delivered to the EBs on 13 October.
Candidate Registration
Any eligible voter residing in the respective municipality can stand for the elections, except those in prison or waiting to serve a prison term of more than six months.
Registered parties, coalitions and groups of voters have the right to nominate candidates.
The latter are required to support a nomination with signatures from 0.2 to 4.8 per cent of eligible voters residing in the respective municipality.
A voter could sign in support of more than one candidate and candidate list.
However, the signatures are required to be collected in front of a SEC representative.
Following an inclusive registration process, 19 parties and coalitions, and 65 groups of voters fielded a total of 370 council lists and 258 mayoral candidates, including 19 independents.
Candidate lists were  published  on  25  September  and  displayed  at  MEC  offices,  enabling  voters  to  familiarize themselves with their prospective candidates.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM is aware of the rejection of  five candidate lists, which were appealed to and dismissed by the Administrative Court.
Contrary to the EC, the SEC held two lotteries on candidate order on the ballot; one for parties and coalitions, and the other for groups of voters.
The latter were placed at the bottom of the list.
To enhance gender equality, the EC requires candidate lists to include not less than 40 per cent of the less represented gender.
In addition, one in every three, plus one in every ten spots must be for the less represented gender.
However, these requirements were undermined by a SEC regulation.
Of the mayoral candidates, 16 were women (6 per cent); and 14 per cent of council lists were headed by women.
MECs registered 9 lists with fewer than 40 per cent women candidates and 17 lists that did not place women on required spots.
The respective MECs attributed this noncompliance to oversight and arithmetic errors.
However, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM was also informed that one MEC that received a list with too few male candidates requested it to be corrected.
There was no opportunity to seek legal redress against approved lists.
Campaign Environment
The official campaign commenced on 25 September and ended at midnight on 13 October.
The EC comprehensively regulates campaigning and generally provides for a level playing field, though independent candidates are not fully granted equitable conditions, such as designated billboard space and media coverage.
The law aims to protect voters from undue pressure and prevent vote-buying.
Various restrictions aim to uphold a separation of the state and party, as well as ban the misuse of administrative resources.
Prior to the official campaign, the government adopted a Declaration on Free and Fair Elections, calling on public and state officials to refrain from fraudulent activities and respect voters’ right to choose freely.
On 24 September at the SEC and MECs, the majority of mayoral candidates signed a Code of Conduct pledging to uphold the law.
The  campaign  took  place  in  an  environment  in  which  fundamental  freedoms  of  assembly  and expression were generally respected.
Voters were offered a range of choices and highly-contested races took place in many municipalities.
Campaigns commenced with festive rallies, where party leaders presented their candidates, unveiled campaign slogans, and outlined policy platforms.
Four of  the  largest  parties  held  rallies  in  administrative  centres,  while  also  relying  on  door-to-door canvassing  and  small-scale  meetings.
Smaller  parties  and  independent  candidates  ran  modest campaigns where they presented their visions for local development.
A number of smaller parties complained to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM about the lack of a level playing field during campaigning.
Overall,  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  interlocutors  consistently  noted  an  improvement  in  the  campaign environment and conduct.
Strategies for municipal campaigns were drawn up at the central level and implemented locally.
The larger parties campaigned on national issues of stability and integration and linked them to local issues of water, sanitation and infrastructure.
The VRMO-DPNME, and to a lesser extent, the SDSM, used negative messages during rallies.
From 25 September, large billboards started to appear in urban  centres, predominantly featuring mayoral candidates.
Parties also opened temporary campaign offices where centrally produced campaign goods were distributed.
During  rallies,  female  candidates  were  often  on  the  main  stage,  but  rarely  spoke.
Also  within campaign management teams, women did not hold leadership positions.
None of the parties addressed issues pertaining to women’s participation in public life.
On 19 September, the government adopted several laws providing financial and social benefits to citizens.
28OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  stakeholders  raised  concerns  over  potential  vote-buying,  voter intimidation, the use of state resources for campaigning and a blurring of state and party; some of these were credible.
Charges were laid against two incumbent mayors for abuse of office, including for election-related offences.
Isolated politically-motivated incidents occurred across the country, related to attacks on campaign offices and violence against one candidate.
In Shuto Orizari, the incumbent mayoral candidate for the Union of Roma from Macedonia (URM) was attacked and injured.
The incident exposed tensions and a high degree of polarization in the Roma community.
Campaign Finance
Campaign finance regulations have undergone significant development in recent years, in line with previous recommendations of the OSCE/ODIHR, Venice Commission, and Council of Europe’s Group of States against Corruption (GRECO).
However, some recommendations to further enhance transparency in campaign finance remain unaddressed, including auditing requirements for interim campaign finance reports and enhanced oversight authority of the State Audit Office (SAO).
Campaigns are funded by party membership fees and private donations.
The EC limits individual donations,  lists  prohibited  sources  and  sets  a  campaign  spending  limit.
Expenses  are  partly  reimbursed by the local administration for lists that receive at least 1.5 per cent of votes cast in a municipality.
Campaign transactions should be administered through a dedicated bank account.
The SAO exercises campaign finance oversight.
Before election day, it had to receive two interim campaign finance reports from electoral contestants.
Final reports are submitted within four months after the elections and the SAO is required to audit these reports.
The SAO’s limited mandate and resources to review reports does not fulfil transparency and accountability requirements as outlined in international obligations and standards.
The SAO is mandated to act on irregularities based on its initiative or a complaint; no such cases have been reported.
Only a small portion of interim reports were submitted and many contestants used an outdated template,  or  did  not  detail  expenditure  as  required  by  the  new  format.
35 Interim  reports  were published  online  by  the  SEC.
In  three  cases,  expenditures  exceeded  income.
Furthermore, expenses were not broken down by municipality, hindering the ability to determine compliance with spending limits.
Media
The media landscape, characterized by a large number of operators in a relatively small market, includes  170  media  outlets.
Television  is  the  main  source  of  information,  the  circulation  of newspapers is low, while growing Internet penetration has led to a significant development of online news websites.
Overall, the media is divided along political lines.
According to OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors, concerns still persist on low professional standards in a number of media outlets to the detriment of the public’s right to receive objective and balanced reporting.
The Constitution guarantees freedom of expression and prohibits censorship.
The EC requires all media, including news websites, to cover the elections in a fair, balanced and unbiased manner.
The public broadcaster’s Macedonian Radio Television (MRT) news coverage of elections is strictly regulated as is the paid advertising in private media.
However, the EC does not explicitly provide for equitable media coverage for independent candidates.
Media compliance with the legal requirements is monitored by the Agency for Audio and Audiovisual Media Services (AVMS), which may apply sanctions and refer the matter to the relevant court.
The AVMS conducted systematic media monitoring and regularly published reports.
The AVMS started six  misdemeanour  proceedings  on  violations  pertaining  to  paid  political  advertising,  unbalanced reporting and the publication of opinion polls.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM media monitoring results showed that as required by the EC, the public broadcaster  provided  all  contestants  with  a  free  airtime  within  prime time.
However,  only  26 candidates used this opportunity on MTV1.
The Albanian speaking candidates did not request any free airtime on MTV2.
The MRT’s news coverage disadvantaged smaller parties and independent candidates, limiting voters’ access to information.
On MTV1, the SDSM received 37 per cent of coverage, VMRO-DPMNE 32 per cent, DUI 11 per cent and BESA 7 per cent.
Other parliamentary parties were given a combined total of 9 per cent coverage, while non-parliamentary received 3 per cent and independent candidates were allotted 1 per cent.
MTV2 dedicated more time to the ethnic Albanian parties.
Private  media  provided  predominant  coverage  to  the  SDSM-led  coalition  mainly  due  to  paid advertising.
The SDSM received 47 per cent of the total coverage, followed by the VMRO-DPMNE with 29 per cent and DUI with 17 per cent.
The SDSM aired negative advertisements throughout the campaign.
Overall, monitored private electronic media demonstrated a rather neutral tone towards candidates in editorial coverage.
Both  public  and  private  broadcast  media  conducted  debates  among  mayoral  candidates  in  their respective  municipalities  and  in  the  MRT  studio  in  Skopje.
The  debates  were  well  organized; however,  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  media  monitoring  results  showed  that  a  high  number  of  invited VMRO-DPMNE candidates did not participate.
Social  media  was  widely  used  in  the  campaign.
A  high  number  of  candidates  opened  official Facebook pages for campaigning.
Overall, candidates from larger parties, particularly the VMRO-DPMNE, used social media more frequently compared to other parties and independent candidates.
Complaints and Appeals
The SEC, SCPC, SAO and Administrative Court adjudicate various election-related complaints and appeals, while basic courts have jurisdiction over civil and criminal cases.
A number of interlocutors informed international observers that they lacked trust in the ability of the election administration and courts to handle election-related cases impartially.
Five Administrative Court judges, who are under pending indictment for the misuse of office in handling a key complaint in the 2013 municipal elections, continued to handle complaints and appeals in these elections, contributing to the perception of bias.
Transparency is reduced by the Administrative Court holding closed sessions.
The EC provides a limited framework for effective legal redress in electoral disputes.
While certain decisions of the SEC and MECs are subject to judicial review, most are not, thus significant aspects of the electoral process are under the final authority of the election administration, contrary to OSCE commitments and international good practice.
Stakeholders have limited rights to seek a legal remedy for campaign-related violations, also at odds with international obligations.
Voter and civic groups have limited rights to challenge irregularities and cannot appeal election results.
Prior to election day, the SEC received few complaints under its limited jurisdiction.
While various OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors raised concerns on the misuse of administrative resources during the campaign, vote-buying and pressure on voters, only a few such complaints were submitted to the SCPC, some of which are under investigation.
Notably, the SCPC’s authority was undermined by parliament when it dismissed the general prosecutor on 17 August, despite such a decision being in violation of the EC.
Participation of National Minorities
Although interethnic relations play a role in municipal elections, they did not feature prominently in the  campaign.
Candidates  and  lists  tend  to  reflect  the  ethnic  composition  of  a  particular municipality.
In  several  cases,  however,  candidates  sought  votes  from  across  ethnic  lines.
In municipalities with an ethnic Albanian majority, several ethnic Albanian parties in the ruling coalition were competing against each other, including high profile candidates.
Parties  representing  smaller  ethnic  communities  fielded  mayoral  candidates  in  only  a  few municipalities where such ethnic groups are concentrated, including Turks in Centar Zhupa and Plasnica, and the Roma in Shuto Orizari.
In other localities, smaller communities presented lists of candidates for councils either with the parties representing such communities or as members of larger coalitions.
Smaller parties complained to the OSCE/ODHIR EOM of not having a SEC member and that they are underrepresented in the local election administration.
The atmosphere was calm in areas where minorities reside, while strong and confrontational rhetoric were observed by candidates belonging to the same community, such as among ethnic Albanian candidates in Struga.
The national media devoted little airtime and space to candidates representing smaller communities and themes relevant to them were afforded limited coverage.
Citizen and International Observers
The EC foresees citizen and international observers’ access to all stages of the electoral process and the binding SEC Code of Conduct calls for impartiality and non-interference in the electoral process.
In  a  timely  and  inclusive  process  the  SEC  accredited  6  citizen  and  24  international  observer organizations, contributing to the transparency of the electoral process.
Citizen observers assessed the preparations for the elections and conduct of the campaign across the country, which offered a non-partisan assessment of the elections.
In addition, a civic initiative was launched to assist persons with disabilities  to  exercise  their  voting  rights.
For  election  day,  the  SEC  accredited  3,000  citizen observers; 2,800 from MOST and 200 from CIVIL.
Contestants also accredited their representatives.
Election Day
Early voting and election day progressed in an orderly manner in most parts of the country.
However, some procedural irregularities were observed, particularly during counting and tabulation.
Police initiated seven cases on alleged vote-buying in five municipalities.
Three of them were referred for prosecution.
Transparency was enhanced by the presence of party and citizen observes in 76 and 52 per cent, respectively, of polling stations observed.
Homebound voters cast their votes on 14 October.
This was negatively assessed in 14 of 96 cases observed.
Vote secrecy was compromised in 13 cases, while in 7 cases, EBs did not use the ballot box.
In several prisons, some inmates were not included in voter lists as they did not have valid ID cards.
Opening was assessed by international observers as good or very good in 75 of 82 polling stations observed.
Most  polling  stations  opened  on  time  or  with  a  slight  delay  with  minor  procedural irregularities observed.
In 14 cases, protocols were not filled in before opening; and in 5 cases, party observers were observed to be interfering in the process.
Voting  was  assessed  positively  in  94  per  cent  of  polling  stations  observed.
The  most  frequent irregularities included family/group and proxy voting (8 and 2 per cent, respectively), improperly sealed ballot boxes (2 per cent), and attempts to influence voter’s choice (1 per cent).
The layout of polling stations insufficiently protected vote secrecy in 2 per cent of observations.
The SEC received requests from more than 10 MECs seeking instructions on how to address irregularities.
Voters could not find their names on voter lists in nine per cent of polling stations observed.
The SEC received more than 45 complaints concerning the denial of the right to vote; most were rejected.
T Braille ballot sleeves were available in 8 per cent of polling stations observed, and more than two thirds of polling stations observed had a wheelchair accessible voting booth.
Counting was assessed as efficient and transparent in 69 out of 78 polling stations observed.
However, in 9 cases, prescribed procedures were not followed, in 15 cases, EBs did not properly invalidate unused ballots and did not determine the number of voters who voted, in 11 cases, unauthorized persons counted ballots.
In 12 cases, EBs faced difficulties in completing protocols.
During tabulation, in 65 out of 71 MECs observed, most followed procedures.
However, deficiencies in transparency (3 cases), insufficient space (12 cases) and disorganization (6 cases) extended the process in six MECs.
In 14 MECs, observers did not have a sufficient view of the data entry process, which limited transparency.
The  SEC  started  releasing  preliminary  results  shortly  after  polls  closed,  which  contributed  to transparency; however, results were not disaggregated by polling station, limiting their scrutiny.
The SEC announced preliminary voter turnout at 60 per cent.
MISSION INFORMATION AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Skopje, 16 October 2017 – This Statement of Preliminary Findings and Conclusions is the result of a common  endeavour  involving  the  OSCE  Office  for  Democratic  Institutions  and  Human  Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) and the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe (Congress).
The assessment was made to determine whether the elections complied with OSCE commitments,  other  international  obligations  and  standards  for  democratic  elections,  and  with national legislation.
Ambassador  Audrey  Glover  is  the  Head  of  the  OSCE/ODIHR  Election  Observation  Mission, deployed from 13 September and Karim Van Overmeire (Belgium) led the Congress delegation.
Both institutions involved in this International Election Observation Mission have endorsed the 2005 Declaration  of  Principles  for  International  Election  Observation.
This  Statement  of  Preliminary Findings and Conclusions is delivered prior to the completion of the electoral process.
The final assessment of the elections will depend, in part, on the conduct of the remaining stages of the electoral process, including the tabulation of results and the handling of possible post-election day complaints and appeals.
The OSCE/ODIHR will issue a comprehensive final report, including recommendations for  potential  improvements,  some  20  weeks  after  the  completion  of  the  electoral  process.
The Congress will present its report at its 34th Session in March 2018.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM includes 17 experts in the capital and 20 long-term observers deployed throughout the country.
On  election day, 208  observers were deployed, including a 13-member delegation from the Congress, which included 12 Council of Europe Member States.
OSCE/ODIHR observers were drawn from 31 OSCE participating States.
The observers wish to thank the authorities of the host country for the invitation to observe the elections, and the State Election Commission for its assistance.
They also wish to express their appreciation  to  other  state  institutions,  political  parties  and  civil  society  organizations  and  the international community representatives for co-operation.
Skopje, 14 July 2004
Joint  statement  by  the  EU  Special  Representative  Søren  Jessen-Petersen,  the  United  States Ambassador  Lawrence  Butler,  Head  of  the    OSCE  Spillover  Monitor  Mission  to  Skopje Ambassador Carlos Pais and NATO Commander Brigadier Dennis Blease “We warmly welcome the agreement reached by the government regarding the laws on Territorial Organisation and the City of Skopje.
The agreement was reached after long and intensive discussions between the coalition partners.
The multi-ethnic governing coalition has shown its ability to put the interest of the state and its citizens first in making an agreement that will benefit the whole country.
We strongly believe that the agreement represents a rational balance fully respecting the spirit and the letter of the Ohrid Framework Agreement, will strengthen local democracy at the municipal level and is in the strong interest of all communities.
The agreement reaffirms the government commitment to move closer to the Euro-Atlantic structures through the full implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement and the international community stands ready to assist the government with all appropriate means to speed up this process.
By agreeing, the partners have also once again confirmed their dedication to the territorial integrity, unitary and multi-ethnic character of the country, which must be preserved and reflected in public life.
Adoption of the decentralisation laws before the end of summer will furthermore allow local elections to take place as scheduled in October.
It will allow for the unabated preparation of the implementation of decentralisation.
The timescales are already tight and progress should continue to move swiftly.
We look forward to constructive engagement by the opposition parties in the forthcoming dialogue.
We also expect the parliament to move with the necessary sense of urgency.
This is vital, as further delay will only hinder progress towards European integration and the future prosperity of this country.
The decentralisation process is of major importance to the delivery of public services to all citizens, to real and substantial local democracy, as well as to the reform of the public administration towards modern European standards.
We commend the government on having taken a bold and courageous step that fully embodies the letter and the spirit of the Ohrid Framework Agreement.”
OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
Election Observation Mission
Republic of North Macedonia
Local Elections, 17 October 2021
INTERIM REPORT
7–27 September 2021
1 October 2021
I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
On 17 October, voters will elect the mayors and councils of 80 municipalities and the City of Skopje.
In municipalities where no mayoral candidate receives the required absolute majority, a second round takes place two weeks later, between the two candidates with the most votes.
Local elections are primarily regulated by the 1991 Constitution and the 2006 Electoral Code.
The Electoral Code has been amended substantially since 2017 and was most recently amended on 15 September 2021, with the stated aim to address prior ODIHR recommendations.
The changes, which apply to these elections, were adopted very close to election day and without any public discussion, though they had broad political support from all parliamentary parties.
The elections are administered by the State Election Commission (SEC), 80 Municipal Election Commissions (MECs) and the Election Commission of the City of Skopje (ECCS), and some 3,480 Election Boards (EBs).
Election-administration bodies have thus far complied with most legal deadlines.
The SEC has held regular open sessions, and the legal framework provides for international and citizen observers and authorized representatives of contestants to follow the electoral process at all levels of the election administration.
Not all SEC decisions and instructions have been published on the SEC website in a timely manner.
The latest Electoral Code amendments affected and delayed the technical and administrative preparations of the elections and necessitated adjustments of SEC instructions, training and educational programmes, as well as election-day materials and procedures.
Voter lists are extracted from a permanent voter register which is updated periodically and, as of 24 September, includes some 1.8 million voters.
Biometric voter identification is being introduced for the first time under a tight timeframe of execution, without an initial pilot project or comprehensive testing.
Most ODIHR EOM interlocutors, including political parties, welcomed the use of biometric voter identification as an effective means to prevent fraud.
Some, however, expressed concerns that potential problems with the use of the devices may negatively impact public trust in the integrity of the elections and in the election administration.
Mayoral candidates and council lists are registered by the respective MECs and the ECCS.
Independent candidates were required to submit voters’ signatures supporting their candidacy.
The Electoral Code provides for a 40 per cent gender quota for council lists.
A total of 571 candidate lists for municipal councils, including some 45 per cent women candidates, and 299 mayoral candidates, out of whom 25 are women, were registered within the legal deadline.
The official campaign period for these elections began on 27 September and will end on 16 October.
The Electoral Code contains provisions banning the use of administrative resources in the campaign, which were complemented by the September amendments.
The pre-campaign environment has generally been peaceful.
However, many stakeholders have raised concerns about emerging negative rhetoric in highly contested races.
Election campaigns are publicly and privately funded.
All campaign transactions must be administered through a dedicated bank account, and contestants must submit four financial reports, two before and two after election day.
Campaign-finance reports must be published online, and the final report must be audited by the State Audit Office, which has limited oversight powers prior to the elections.
The SCPC has authority to initiate ex-officio proceedings throughout the election period.
The large number of media outlets are divided along political lines.
Television and online media are the main sources of political information.
The Electoral Code requires all media outlets, including online media, to cover elections in a fair, balanced and unbiased manner, and the public broadcaster is required to provide contestants with free airtime during primetime.
Paid political advertisement in private broadcast, print and online media during the campaign period is funded directly from the state budget.
Media compliance with legal requirements is overseen by the Agency for Audio and Audio-visual Media Services, including through its own monitoring of the campaign period.
Complaints can be filed with MECs, the SEC, and the basic courts.
Complaints concerning campaign finance and misuse of administrative resources can be lodged with the State Commission for Prevention of Corruption (SCPC).
Voters can only file complaints regarding voter lists and on violation of their right to vote.
The SEC and the SCPC have reported few complaints. Following the September amendments, the Administrative Court has filed an official request for clarification concerning the deadlines for review of election-day complaints.
II. INTRODUCTION
Following an invitation from the authorities of North Macedonia to observe the 17 October 2021 local elections, the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) established an Election Observation Mission (EOM) on 7 September.
The mission, led by Tana de Zulueta, consists of a 13-member core team based in Skopje and 20 long-term observers (LTOs) deployed on 15 September to 9 locations around the country.
Mission members are drawn from 19 OSCE participating States.
ODIHR has requested participating States to second 250 short-term observers to observe election-day proceedings.
III. BACKGROUND AND POLITICAL CONTEXT
On 6 August 2021, the Speaker of Parliament called local elections for 17 October.
The most recent local elections took place in 2017, when the coalition led by the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM), which had successfully formed a ruling coalition following the December 2016 parliamentary elections, gained control of the majority of municipalities.
The government, headed by SDSM president Zoran Zaev, is supported by a coalition of the SDSM, DUI and several smaller political parties.
Women are underrepresented in public office, holding only 45 of the 120 seats in the current parliament and 4 of the 15 ministerial posts in the government.
In the 2017 local elections, women were elected to 6 of 81 mayoral positions and represented some 34 per cent of elected councilors.
The country’s long-standing aspirations for European Union (EU) membership and related postponements in accession talks, disagreements over the management of the COVID-19 pandemic by the government, concerns over the economic situation, particularly the high unemployment rate, and concerns over negative political rhetoric form the backdrop to these elections.
A population census, the first since 2002, was launched on 5 September and is scheduled to last until 30 September.
IV. LEGAL FRAMEWORK AND ELECTORAL SYSTEM
Local elections are primarily regulated by the 1991 Constitution and the 2006 Electoral Code.
Other relevant acts include the 2004 Law on Financing of Political Parties, the 2019 Law on Prevention of Corruption and Conflict of Interests, the 2013 Law on Media, and the 2013 Law on Audio and Audiovisual Media Services.
North Macedonia has ratified key international human rights instruments pertaining to the holding of democratic elections.
The Electoral Code has been amended substantially since the last local elections, including twice in 2021.
On 2 April, amendments were passed to supplement provisions on biometric voter identification.
On 15 September, the parliament suddenly adopted a number of amendments, most of which apply to these local elections.
The amendments include provisions related to the voting rights of citizens with intellectual disabilities, the withdrawal of candidate lists, safeguards against the misuse of public resources, campaigning in the media, deadlines for the submission and review of complaints, and the tenure of the State Election Commission (SEC).
While parliament announced that these amendments stem from previous ODIHR recommendations, the ODIHR EOM was informed that a more comprehensive electoral reform is scheduled for after the elections to implement, inter alia, ODIHR recommendations which remain unaddressed.
The 15 September amendments were adopted under an expedited procedure without prior public debate.
While acknowledging that the changes were adopted very close to election day, most ODIHR EOM interlocutors noted that the process had broad political support,7 though key stakeholders such as the SEC said that they were not consulted on the draft amendments and raised concerns about the hasty adoption of important changes and the technical capacity to implement them in the limited time available before election day.
Local councils and mayors will be elected for a four-year term in direct elections in the 80 municipalities and the City of Skopje.
Elections of councilors are held under a closed-list proportional representation system without a threshold.
Mayors are elected under a two-round majoritarian system.
If no candidate receives an absolute majority of the votes cast in the first round, a second round takes place two weeks later, between the two candidates with the most votes.
At least one-third of voters registered in a municipality must turn out in the first round for the mayoral election to be valid, otherwise the election must be repeated.
The turnout requirement does not apply to possible second rounds and to council elections.
V. ELECTION ADMINISTRATION
Local elections are administered by a three-tiered structure led by the SEC and comprising 80 Municipal Election Commissions (MECs) and the Election Commission of the City of Skopje (ECCS) as well as some 3,480 Election Boards (EBs).
The composition of each election management body must meet legal requirements for gender and ethnic representation.
The SEC is a permanent body composed of seven members who are elected by parliament.
Following an open recruitment process, four members, including the vice president, are proposed by the ruling parties, and three members, including the president, by the opposition parties from a draft list of applicants.
The SEC in its current composition was appointed in January 2021 for a temporary two-year term; however, the 15 September amendments introduced a five-year term.
Only two of the current SEC members are women, including the vice president.
For administrative and organizational matters, the SEC is assisted by a professional service, led by a secretary general.
The mandate of the previous secretary general expired in January 2021 and the position has since been vacant.
The current MECs and the ECCS, as well as the non-partisan members of EBs, were appointed in June and July 2021, respectively, for five- and four-year terms.
MECs supervise the administration of elections in the respective municipality, register candidates, appoint and train EBs, and manage other technical preparations.
Upon initial selection, women comprised 49 per cent of MEC and ECCS members, presiding over 39 of the 81 mid-level bodies.
In several municipalities, the composition of MECs and EBs have not yet been finalized as a considerable turnover among selected members was reported, mostly due to health reasons or conflict of interest in cases of members running for election.
To date, election-administration bodies have complied with most legal deadlines.
The SEC has held regular sessions which have been open to the media, observers, and authorized candidate representatives and which were live-streamed online, with recordings also made available on the SEC’s YouTube channel.
Sessions are announced solely via an official mailing list, often at very short notice.
Not all session minutes, decisions and instructions adopted have been published on the SEC website in a consistent and timely manner.
See previous ODIHR election reports on North Macedonia.
Currently, out of 80 municipalities and the City of Skopje, SDSM holds 57 mayorships, the ethnic-Albanian Democratic Union for Integration (DUI) 10, the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization – Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity (VMRO-DPMNE) 5, and the Alliance of Albanians (AA) 3, while 3 mayors are independents.
The Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA), the ethnic-Albanian Movement BESA (BESA), and the Democratic Party of Turks in Macedonia (DPTM) each hold one mayoral position.
The current government also includes one minister each from the Movement BESA (BESA) and the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP).
The SDSM-led coalition that won the parliamentary elections in 2020 included a total of 20 smaller parties.
Including the 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the 1965 International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD), the 1979 United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), the 2003 UN Convention against Corruption (UNCAC), the 2006 UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), and the 1950 European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR).
North Macedonia is a member of the Council of Europe’s European Commission for Democracy through Law (Venice Commission) and the Group of States against Corruption (GRECO).
Previously, changes to the Electoral Code were introduced in February 2020, affecting most electoral procedures and key responsibilities of the election administration.
The Code was also amended in 2017, 2018, and 2019.
An inter-agency working group, tasked to propose amendments to the Electoral Code and convened by the Ministry of Justice, met several times during December 2020 and April 2021.
The working group was originally established in 2015 and reinstated following a 20 July 2016 agreement between four main political parties; the group continued its activities until 2021 under the co-ordination of the Ministry of Justice.
The amendments were submitted by members of parliament from the six main parliamentary groups, representing both government and opposition, and adopted by a near-unanimous vote (78 votes for, 2 against, and 1 abstention).
The latest amendments to the Electoral Code affected and delayed the technical and administrative preparations of the elections and necessitated last-minute adjustments of SEC instructions, training and educational programmes, as well as election-day materials and procedures.
The SEC training department developed a comprehensive training programme and completed initial trainings of MECs and SEC-certified trainers by mid-September; however, these trainings did not cover the use of the biometric voter identification devices (BVIDs) and reflected the election procedures in force before the adoption of the latest amendments.
Supplementary training sessions for SEC trainers on use of the BVIDs and new procedures were held on 24 and 25 September, after the adoption of the revised instructions and the setup of technical equipment.
The number of councilors is determined by the population size of the municipality and ranges from 9 to 33, with 45 representatives to be elected to the Council of the City of Skopje.
Seats are allocated using the d’Hondt formula.
The announced electoral reform foresees altering the electoral system to introduce open candidate lists.
The final number of operational EBs will only be determined after the completion of the voter registration process, given that polling stations will not be open in areas which have fewer than the minimum number of ten registered voters required for establishing a polling station.
Each gender shall be represented by at least 30 per cent of members, and all ethnicities which comprise at least 20 per cent of the respective municipal population should be represented.
The September 2021 amendments stipulate that in case of a change of government, the composition of the SEC shall be harmonized accordingly.
MECs and the ECCS are composed of five members and their deputies, randomly selected by the SEC from among employees of the state and municipal administrations.
EBs comprise three members and their deputies, randomly selected by MECs from among public and civil servants for a four-year term, and two temporary members and their deputies nominated for each election by parliamentary parties.
The two ruling and two opposition parties which received the highest number of votes in the last parliamentary elections nominate one member and deputy each.
VI. VOTER REGISTRATION
All citizens who are at least 18 years old on election day have the right to vote, except those fully or partially deprived of legal capacity by a court decision on the basis of intellectual or psychosocial disability.
To be included in the voter register, citizens must have a registered address in the country and a valid identification card or passport
The September 2021 amendments allow citizens whose ID has expired after the announcement of the elections and who have requested a new ID by election day to be included in the voter register.
Due to contradictions in the Electoral Code relating to updating the register, citizens who turn 18 between the first and second round are not included.
The SEC is responsible for maintaining and updating the voter register, from which voter lists are extracted, on the basis of regular updates from various state institutions.
In practice, the State Statistical Office ensures the technical and methodological processing of voter register data.
The legal requirement for the voter register to be extracted from a National Population Register has yet to be implemented.
All ODIHR EOM interlocutors expressed confidence in the accuracy and reliability of the voter register, though some recognized that a significant number of citizens residing abroad remain in the register as they maintain an official residence in-country.
On 24 September, the SEC closed the voter register, with a total of 1,824,864 voters, and started the printing of the voter lists.
Citizens could verify their data in the voter register online and at SEC regional offices throughout the year, as well as during a public inspection period which took place from 21 August to 9 September.
Between 15 and 20 September, all parties contesting the elections could collect an electronic copy of the voter register, without copy-protection.
The timeline for parties to appeal SEC decisions regarding the voter register can prevent the SEC from closing the register by the legal deadline; there were no such appeals in these elections.
The law does not provide for scrutiny of the register by independent candidates.
Biometric voter identification, introduced with the February 2020 revisions to the Electoral Code, will be used for the first time in these elections for all voters in regular polling stations, without a pilot project and without sufficient time for comprehensive testing of the hardware and software.
A public procurement process was not initiated until June 2021, after which a total of 4,000 mobile BVIDs were procured in August 2021.
Most machines were not delivered until the month prior to the scheduled election day.
The September 2021 amendments introduced the possibility for citizens partially deprived of legal capacity to regain their voting rights based on a court decision, but this provision in practice has no effect on voting rights for these elections.
Including the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Justice, and basic courts.
Including 82,461 voters registered as residing abroad, who are entitled to vote in-country but are included in separate lists, as well as 2,250 in penitentiary and care institutions who are entitled to vote early on 16 October.
The search can be performed based on citizens’ unique identification number or by address.
A total of 15 parties collected an electronic copy of the voter register.
Of a total of 16 requests for corrections submitted by 2 political parties, 11 requests for inclusion of voters were rejected by the SEC.
The voter list of each polling station is to be uploaded on devices that will scan voters’ fingerprints to verify their identity by matching the fingerprint on record.
The BVIDs, which are not networked or connected to the Internet, are to be operated by the EB president or vice president.
Paper lists are to be used as a contingency in case of technical problems with the BVIDs.
Most ODIHR EOM interlocutors, including political parties, welcomed the introduction of biometric voter identification as an effective means to prevent fraud, including multiple voting and voter impersonation.
Some, however, expressed concerns that any potential problems with the use of the new devices may negatively impact public trust in the integrity of the elections and in the election administration.
VII. CANDIDATE REGISTRATION
Citizens who are at least 18 years of age on election day and have the right to vote are eligible to stand for the office of mayor or councilor in the municipality of their registered residence.
The legal framework forbids those currently serving or awaiting to serve a delivered sentence of more than six months of imprisonment from standing in elections.
Candidates for mayor and for councilor could be nominated by registered political parties or coalitions of parties, or they can run independently (individually as mayors or, in the case of councilors, on lists), supported by groups of voters.
Each gender must account for at least 40 per cent of candidates on all lists for municipal councils, with a requirement that a candidate of the less represented gender is included in each group of three consecutive places, with an additional place within every group of ten candidates reserved for a candidate of the less represented gender.
To support independent candidacies, groups of voters must collect between 100 and 450 supporting signatures of voters residing in the respective municipality, depending on the size of the municipality’s population, and at least 1,000 signatures for candidate lists at the level of the City of Skopje.
For these elections, supporting signatures were collected between 16 and 30 August, in the presence of SEC officials at the SEC regional offices or at designated notaries’ offices.
Nominating documents had to be submitted to MECs and the ECCS by 11 September.
Upon receipt, MECs and the ECCS had 24 hours to verify the submitted documents.
Submitters of candidate lists had two days to remedy any deficiencies identified in the nomination documents.
Some MECs informed the ODIHR EOM that they were not always able to comply with all deadlines, due to the late submission of data regarding candidates’ criminal records by courts.
The first tender launched on 21 May 2021 was annulled by the Bureau for Public Procurement.
The contract with the German company Dermalog was signed on 11 August 2021.
Two local companies, Simboliko and AlphazetMacedonia, are subcontracted for trainings and for uploading the voter lists to the devices, and for managing a call center for technical assistance, respectively.
As of 27 September, 1,180 out of 4,000 mobile units had been delivered to the SEC.
The remaining shipments are expected in-country by 2 October.
If a voter’s fingerprint cannot be verified against the fingerprint in the electronic voter list, voter identification will be done by scanning the voter’s ID or entering the personal unique identification number.
The Electoral Code requires that the number of candidates on submitted lists equals the available seats in the respective municipality, which precludes candidates from running individually.
All submitted candidate lists must be accompanied by political parties’ registration certificates, as applicable; an irrevocable statement of consent with candidacy, statement of ethnic community affiliation, and copy of a valid ID or passport of each candidate; confirmation of a unique tax number from the Central Registry; confirmation of an open bank account dedicated only for campaign purposes; and an election symbol, if any, in digital form.
Of 69 groups of voters which intended to nominate candidate lists for municipal councils, 67 obtained the required number of signatures.
For the nomination of mayoral candidates, 30 of 38 prospective independent candidates collected the number of signatures required for registration.
According to the SEC, within the legal deadline of 18 September, MECs and the ECCS registered a total of 10,649 candidates on 571 candidate lists for municipal councils submitted by 28 political parties, 6 coalitions and 58 groups of voters.
Women comprise some 45 per cent of all councilor candidates and head 111 candidate lists (19 per cent).
Mayoral elections will be contested by a total of 299 candidates (including 25 women, or 8 per cent) nominated by 22 political parties, 5 coalitions, and 25 groups of voters.
The ODIHR EOM is aware of rejections of three mayoral candidates and nine candidate lists for municipal councilors by MECs on grounds of late submission or deficiencies in nomination documents.
VIII. CAMPAIGN ENVIRONMENT
The official campaign period started on 27 September and ends on 15 October at midnight.
The Electoral Code contains provisions banning the use of administrative resources in the campaign, including a moratorium, from the day elections are called, on announcing new publicly funded projects and the prohibition of the use of state offices, equipment or personnel for campaigning, as well as of pressure on public employees.
From the announcement of elections, payments of salaries, pensions or welfare other than regular payments may not be made from budgetary funds.
The September 2021 amendments complemented existing rules governing the campaign and aim to enhance the transparency of the use of public resources, such as vehicles, during the electoral campaign.
Competing in the upcoming local elections will be political parties and party-led coalitions, as well as a large number of independent candidates supported by groups of voters.
During the reporting period, the pre-campaign environment has generally been peaceful.
Most parties announced that their campaign strategies will employ positive campaigning as a method to counteract the trading of accusations and personal attacks among political leaders which characterized previous campaigns.
However, most ODIHR EOM interlocutors expressed concerns over negative rhetoric that surfaced prior to the official start of the campaign.
Political parties also pledged to adhere to the rules governing the electoral campaign by signing a Code for Fair and Democratic Elections on 23 September, under the auspices of the SEC.
All contestants met by the ODIHR EOM indicated that their campaign plans will be adjusted to address challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, by prioritizing small community meetings over large rallies and conducting extensive online activities.
Political parties representing smaller ethnic communities, including Roma, Serbs and Turks, continue to align with stronger political forces in pre-election coalitions.
For these elections, the Bosniak Democratic Union (BDS) will run independently for the first time, including for the position of Skopje city mayor.
Parties representing Serbian and Turkish communities informed the ODIHR EOM that notwithstanding their participation in larger coalitions, they will also conduct separate campaign activities in their respective communities.
For example, in the municipalities of Aerodrom, Butel, Centar, Petrovec, Sopishte, and Vinica.
Some contestants started to engage voters in activities prior to the official start of the campaign.
For example, billboards mentioning accomplishments by SDSM and criticizing the record of VMRO-DPMNE are in evidence in Skopje and several other municipalities.
ODIHR EOM long-term observers were informed about the SDSM candidate for mayor meeting voters in Prilep and engaging them on his Facebook page, and of SDSM and VMRODPMNE candidates meeting with voters in Krushevo.
In Skopje, the Green Humane City coalition held a public event with voters on 22 September.
The configuration on coalitions differs depending on the municipality.
For example, in Skopje and some other municipalities, the SDSM-led coalition, “The Best for My Municipality”, comprises DUI, BESA, and DPA as well as a number of smaller parties; the coalition led by VMRO-DPMNE, “The Renewal of Macedonia”, includes AA and AlternAtivA; while the Democratic Renewal of Macedonia (DOM) and the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) form the “Movement Determined for Change” coalition.
IX. CAMPAIGN FINANCE
Election campaigns may be funded from political parties’ own funds and bank loans, as well as from donations.
Donations from foreign, state, municipal, and anonymous sources, as well as from public, religious and charitable organizations are prohibited.
Paid political advertisement in the broadcast, print and online media is funded directly by the state, through a separate fund (see Media).
Political parties that received more than one per cent of the vote in previous parliamentary or local elections are entitled to public funding for their regular activities.
Donations, whether monetary or in-kind, are limited to EUR 3,000 for individuals and EUR 30,000 for legal entities (in MKD equivalent, in both cases).
Any free or discounted goods or services must be reported at their market price.
The campaign spending limit is MKD 110 (approximately EUR 1.8) per voter registered in a municipality, for each round of an election.
For campaign-finance purposes, the law does not distinguish between mayoral and council elections.
All campaign transactions must be administered through a dedicated bank account.
Contestants must keep a registry of donations and must submit four financial reports on income and expenditures, two of which are due before election day.
The first post-election report is due within 19 days from election day, and the final report is due within 75 days from the announcement of final results.
Campaign-finance reports must be submitted to the SEC, State Audit Office (SAO), and the State Commission for Prevention of Corruption (SCPC), and must be published on the websites of these institutions.
Only the final report must be audited by the SAO, which can only initiate inquiries and investigations based on these final reports.
The SCPC, which can initiate ex-officio proceedings throughout the election period, informed the ODIHR EOM of plans to field 16 monitors during the campaign.
The Electoral Code provides for fines of up to EUR 9,000 for violations of campaign-finance regulations, including for exceeding donation or spending limits or for failing to submit a financial report.
Criminal sanctions for violations of campaign-finance regulations include fines and imprisonment.
X. MEDIA
A large number of media outlets, divided along political lines, operate in a small advertisement market.
Television and online media are the main sources of political information.
The public broadcaster, Macedonian Radio and Television (MRT), is financed from the state budget, which in the view of some ODIHR EOM interlocutors affects its editorial independence.
Although ODIHR EOM interlocutors noted general improvements in the media field in recent years, they raised concerns about selfcensorship, a low level of professionalism, cyber-harassment, especially against women journalists, and poor labour conditions in the media field.
Under the Law on Financing of Political Parties, 0.15 per cent of the income portion of the annual state budget must be designated for subsidies to political parties.
Of this, 70 per cent should be allocated to parliamentary parties proportional to the number of seats obtained, and 30 per cent should be allocated equally to all parties that received at least one per cent of votes in the last parliamentary or local elections.
In 2021, some 58 political parties received state funding; of these, SDSM received MKD 49,956,552, and VMRO-DPMNE MKD 44,039,448 and (approximately EUR 818,000 and 722,000, respectively).
EUR 1 equals approximately MKD 61.
Depending on the population size of the municipalities, spending limits range from EUR 3,571 to EUR 169,174.
The first interim report is due on 8 October, and the second on 16 October.
No deadlines are specified in the law for publishing the reports.
The Electoral Code requires all media outlets, including online media, to cover the elections in a fair, balanced and unbiased manner.
During the official campaign period, MRT is obliged to dedicate 30 per cent of its newscasts to general events, 30 per cent to the parliamentary ruling parties, 30 per cent to the parliamentary opposition, and 10 per cent to non-parliamentary parties and independent candidates.
MRT is also required to provide political contestants with free airtime during primetime.
Private broadcasters must provide equal airtime to all mayoral candidates, while submitters of councilor lists should also receive an equal amount of airtime in local broadcast media.
National public and private broadcasters are obliged to supplement all electoral coverage with sign language.
Paid political advertisement in private broadcast, print and online media during the campaign period is funded directly from the state budget, which has been criticized by some ODIHR EOM interlocutors as potentially encouraging clientelism in the media.
Media that plan to provide paid airtime to contestantsmust register with the SEC.
The September 2021 amendments to the Electoral Code inter alia prescribe that eight minutes of paid airtime and 90 per cent of funds are to be equally divided between the two largest ruling and the two largest parliamentary opposition parties, one minute and 7 per cent of funds are to be allocated to smaller parliamentary parties, and 30 seconds and 3 per cent of funds, to non-parliamentary parties and independent candidates.
Media compliance with legal requirements relating to electoral coverage is overseen by the statefinanced Agency for Audio and Audio-visual Media Services (AVMS).
The AVMS commenced its monitoring on 7 August and submits to the SEC weekly reports before and daily reports during the official campaign period.
In case the AVMS identifies violations in the broadcast media, it shall initiate a misdemeanor procedure with the competent court within 48 hours.
On 22 September, the ODIHR EOM commenced its quantitative and qualitative monitoring of electionrelated coverage on six nationwide television channels and four news websites.
XI. COMPLAINTS AND APPEALS
Under the Electoral Code, complaints can be filed with MECs, the SEC, and the basic courts.
Complaints concerning campaign finance and misuse of administrative resources can be lodged with the SCPC.
The jurisdiction of MECs is limited to complaints by voters regarding alleged violations of their rights during the voting procedure.
Basic courts and the SEC review complaints against campaign violations, and their jurisdiction on these matters is not clearly delineated.
The Administrative Court is the final instance of appeals for the majority of complaints.
While SEC decisions on violations of individual rights can be appealed to the Administrative Court, SEC regulations can only be challenged before the Constitutional Court, with no expedited procedure provided.
The appellate courts are the final instances for reviewing challenges against election-related decisions of the basic courts.
MRT provides its own studio for the recording of the free spots, which will be broadcast from 4 to 14 October.
The law prescribes that national and local broadcasters should follow the principle of proportionality, based on the number of confirmed lists of candidates.
The total budget allocated for media campaigns may not exceed EUR 2 per registered in-country voter, and an additional EUR 1 per registered voter during a second round.
The average price for paid political advertising in each media outlet may not exceed the total average cost of advertising calculated for the last five election cycles.
Pricelists should be submitted to and confirmed by the SEC.
The SEC registered 35 television stations, 44 radio stations, 10 print media outlets, and 191 online news sites.
Before the start of the official campaign period, the AVMS monitored seven national TV channels, while it intends to include some regional and local broadcasters during the official campaign.
As of 24 September, no violations have been reported by the AVMS.
These include the public MRT 1 and MRT 2, private broadcasters Alsat-M, Kanal 5, Telma, and Sitel, as well as the election-related coverage of the websites kurir.mk, plusinfo.mk, tetovasot.com, and lajmpress.org.
There are four appellate courts in North Macedonia, based in Skopje, Bitola, Gostivar and Shtip.
As a general rule, the right to lodge complaints is granted to contestants and voters.
Voters can only file complaints regarding voter lists and on violation of their right to vote.
Citizen observers can have remarks on alleged irregularities entered in EB logbooks; these remarks are not treated as complaints but can serve as ground for contestants to file complaints.
The deadlines for submitting and deciding on complaints are short: as a rule, applicants have up to two days to file a complaint, with one to three days provided for review of most complaints.
Following the latest changes to the Electoral Code, electionday complaints by voters must be lodged within 12 hours (previously 24 hours) and must be reviewed within two hours.
The ODIHR EOM was informed by the Administrative Court that the latest changes adversely affected the clarity of the deadlines.
XII. CITIZEN AND INTERNATIONAL OBSERVERS
The Electoral Code provides for citizen and international observation of the entire election process.
Citizen associations and foreign organizations which have been registered at least one year before election day and whose charters incorporate the principle of protection of human rights may apply for accreditation to deploy observers with the SEC until 10 days before election day.
Expecting to deploy the largest group of citizen observers for these elections, CIVIL – Center for Freedom has conducted long-term observation activities across the country since mid-August, including monitoring of the media, social media platforms, and activities of political parties.
Entities with registered candidates are entitled to appoint their authorized representatives to follow the election process at all levels of the election administration.
Candidate representatives to lower-level election bodies can be registered with MECs until two days before election day.
XIII. ODIHR EOM ACTIVITIES
The ODIHR EOM commenced its activities in Skopje on 7 September.
The Head of Mission has met with the SEC President, the Prime Minister, the Minister of Justice, the President of the Administrative Court, the Chairperson of the Legislative Committee of Parliament, and representatives of political parties.
The ODIHR EOM has established regular contacts with the SEC, governmental institutions involved in the electoral process, the judiciary, political parties, candidates, civil society, the media, and the resident diplomatic and international community.
The English version of this report is the only official document.
Unofficial translations are available in Macedonian and Albanian.
Following the amendments, the Administrative Court has filed an official request with the Ministry of Justice for clarification concerning the deadlines for review of election-day complaints.
While the Electoral Code and the SEC calendar set ten days before election day as the latest date for submission of applications for accreditation, the SEC Code of Conduct indicates five days.
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
Assessment of Sharing Personal Information from the Public Registers in the Process of Updating the Voter Register
OSCE/ODIHR Expert Visit
16 – 19 September 2013
Warsaw 12 December 2013
THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
ASSESSMENT OF SHARING PERSONAL INFORMATION FROM THE PUBLIC REGISTERS IN THE PROCESS OF UPDATING THE VOTER REGISTER
INTRODUCTION AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Following an invitation from the State Election Commission (SEC) of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia  to undertake an assessment on the manner in which personal information from citizen’s registers is shared in the process of updating the voter register, the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) deployed an Expert Team (the Team) to Skopje from 16 to 19 September 2013.
The OSCE/ODIHR Team included Mr. Zoran Đoković, OSCE/ODIHR Migration/Freedom of Movement Adviser and Mr. Nikolai Vulchanov, external expert.
This expert visit was organized in follow-up to recommendations from past OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation Missions (EOMs) and in an effort to assist the authorities and other relevant stakeholders with their implementation.
The visit was in line with the commitment made by all OSCE participating States in the 1999 Charter for European Security, and reaffirmed at the 2002 Ministerial Conference in Porto, to follow up promptly on OSCE/ODIHR election assessments and recommendations.
The Team assessed the process of updating voters’ data included in voter lists based on personal information, including official records of identity, vital life events and place of residence, kept in the civil, residency and other registers maintained by relevant state institutions.
The Team reviewed the applicable regulatory framework and identified areas where improvements could be considered.
With the aim of assessing the quality of information kept in the civil and residency registers and how it reflects on the accuracy of voter lists.
The administrative framework for maintenance of the address register was also analyzed and finally, the Team looked at possible short- and long-term measures to enhance the efficiency of voters’ personal data collection, its updating and sharing by and between state institutions.
The OSCE/ODIHR is grateful to the SEC for the invitation and the opportunity to contribute to its efforts aimed at increasing the accuracy of voter lists, as well as for SEC support in organizing the Team’s visit and the availability of its staff for discussions.
The OSCE/ODIHR wishes to express its appreciation to other institutions and individuals for their openness and availability to provide insight on the topics discussed during the visit (see list of interlocutors in an Annex 1).
The support provided to the Team by the OSCE Mission to Skopje is also highly appreciated.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Under the Electoral Code of “the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia” (the Electoral Code), the SEC is tasked with maintaining the voter register, from which voter lists are drawn, and with ensuring their accuracy.
To date, the SEC has limited capacity to maintain the voter register and consequently, the voter register is maintained by the State Statistical Office (SSO).
In addition, for the same reason, the SEC does not exercise sufficient quality control over the voter lists.
In updating the voter register, the SEC uses personal identity, vital life events and place of residence information provided by the institutions as defined under the Electoral Code.
It appears that the SEC has yet to develop a sufficiently detailed methodology to assess the voter register for information that could help identify possible discrepancies in the voters’ data or potential abuse of voter registration procedures which require further action.
Under the Electoral Code, the SEC does not have sufficient legal authority to change the information in the voter register submitted by the relevant institutions.
While the SEC’s inspection of the voter register may prompt the SEC to review certain information in the register, amendments are possible only if they are supported by legally valid personal information.
Unless inaccurate information is a result of mistakes in the transfer process, all inaccuracies in the voter register and the voter lists are inherited from information submitted by relevant state institutions legally responsible for registering and maintaining it.
Consequently, it is debatable whether the SEC should be the authority tasked with resolving such inaccuracies.
Voters’ personal data provided by the Ministry of Interior (MoI) are the main source of information used for the compilation of the voter register.
In the process of updating information in the voter register, the MoI provides legally valid information with regard to voters’ identities and places of residence.
The role of the MoI is underscored by the fact that only those citizens in possession of a valid ID issued by the MoI can be included in the voter lists.
Therefore, the accuracy of information provided by the MoI directly affects the accuracy of voter lists.
It would appear that the MoI exercises limited control in ensuring that the information on a registered place of residence is up-to-date.
Some voters may not reside at the places of residence where they are registered as a result of failing to report to the authorities the change of place of residence.
While the mechanism for ensuring that citizens comply with the requirement for reporting the change of place of residence is based on fines, consideration should be given to developing sufficient incentives for citizens to report a change of place of residence in a timely manner to avoid a situation where the registration of residence is maintained even though occupancy rights may have ceased to exist.
Voters that have a long-term residence or live permanently abroad are issued passports and included in the voter lists on the basis of their last known residence address in the country.
The use of the last known address as the criterion for issuing passports to such citizens could be reviewed with a view to protecting their right to vote and to ensure that voter lists are not perceived by the public as inflated.
The Directorate for Keeping Personal Records (the Directorate) under the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) is responsible for the registration of legally valid personal information on identity and vital life events of citizens.
However, in the process of updating information in the voter register, the role of the Directorate is limited to providing information on deceased voters which is communicated to the SEC through regular updates from the MoI and directly via SEC’s regional offices.
While sharing of population and voter information between institutions overall works, it does so using different levels of technology including paper flow or the copying of a large array of data on compact disks, rather than having direct on-line access to the data maintained by other institutions.
In the short term, the SEC should develop a detailed set of queries to assess the accuracy of the voter register and to provide regular updates to the public on the changes made in the register.
Such activities could serve to further enhance public confidence in the voter lists.
The SEC should also run an inspection of the voter register to detect information which would require further follow-up by the authorities responsible for its maintenance and updating.
This is particularly important with regard to information concerning the number of changes of place of residence in a given municipality or if unusually high numbers of people are registered as residing at the same address.
In the long term, it could be useful to assess the cost-effectiveness of maintaining a voter register in parallel to the registers of citizens maintained by the MoI or in the future by the Directorate under the MoJ.
In this context, consideration could be given as to whether either of these two agencies which are legally responsible for the registration of personal information should also be responsible for the compilation of the voter lists on the basis of information they already have, and whether political consensus for such a decision could be reached.
Alternatively, it might be necessary to fully develop the capacity of the SEC to assume responsibility for the maintenance of the voter register.
BACKGROUND
The quality of voter lists has been a long-standing issue.
It has been commented upon in OSCE/ODIHR election observation reports and joint opinions of the OSCE/ODIHR and the Council of Europe’s Commission for Democracy Through Law (the Venice Commission).
These documents underscored the need to review and audit voter lists with a view to increase their accuracy and enhance public confidence in the voter registration process.
For the 2011 early parliamentary elections, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM Final Report highlighted that 1.82 million citizens, out of an estimated population of 2.05 million, were eligible to vote.
The report further underlined that a difference between the number of registered voters and the estimated size of population led to “[…] persistent doubts about the accuracy of the voter lists […]’ and recommended a “[…] thorough audit and revision of the voter lists […] to focus on entries of deceased people and citizens residing abroad […]”.
Following the 2011 parliamentary elections and on the basis of broad political agreement, the authorities introduced an interpretation of Article 41(4) of the Electoral Code4, whereby after 29 February 2012 the term “valid documents” would mean the issuance of a new personal identity card or travel document (international passport) with biometric features.
To address recommendations from the OSCE/ODIHR EOM Final Report on the 2011 early parliamentary elections, in 2012, the government established a Working Group on Voter Lists tasked to review the voter lists and define policy actions aimed at increasing the accuracy of voter lists.
The Working Group concentrated on monitoring the progress of the issuance of new identification documents and biometric passports since the possession of these documents determined voting right eligibility.
For the municipal elections held in March 2013, 1,743,403 voters were determined eligible to vote and included in the voter lists.
Compared with the 2011 early parliamentary elections, some 119,000 people were removed from the voter lists as they did not possess a personal identity card or biometric passport.
In its final report for these elections, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM reported that complaints regarding the accuracy of voter lists persisted while also taking note of enhanced public confidence in the accuracy of voter lists.
The OSCE/ODIHR recommended that “[…] Consideration should be given to conducting a review of the procedures for compiling and maintaining voter lists. Clear, coordinated, and transparent procedures would enhance accuracy of the voter lists and contribute to public confidence. […].”.
Based on Article 42 of the Electoral Code, registration of vital life events defining personal identity, such as birth, death and marriage or divorce, as well as the registration of permanent residence, is key to the compilation of accurate voter lists.
Therefore, the Team focused on these procedures, with a view to assessing them in the context of the collection, updating and sharing of citizens’ personal data related to vital life events and permanent residence between institutions.
ASSESSMENT FINDINGS
MAINTENANCE OF THE VOTER REGISTER
Voter registration is regulated in Articles 2, 5-6, 31 and 41 – 56. of the Electoral Code.
The right to vote is granted to citizens who are 18 years old, reside in the constituency, or municipality, where the election takes place and have a valid personal identity card or passport.
Citizens exercise their voting right at a polling station located within the area defined by the SEC and within which they have registered a place of residence.
The Electoral Code does not specify a requirement that a voter should reside for a specific period of time ahead of Election Day within a given constituency in order to have the right to vote.
In line with Article 41(2) of the Electoral Code, the SEC is responsible to maintain the voter register from which voter lists are to be extracted.
However, since the authority over voter registration was transferred from the MoJ to the SEC in 2009, the SEC still does not have appropriate resources to manage the voter register and to produce voter lists without external support.
In accordance with Article 203 of the Electoral Code, until the SEC is technically ready to maintain a voter register without external support, it is maintained by the SSO.
The Team was informed that with appropriate investment to expand the SEC’s technical capacity, the SEC feels confident that it could maintain the voter register.
At the same time, the Team was informed of an ongoing project implemented by the SEC aimed at computerizing its regional offices and providing them with online connection with the SEC.
It appears however, that concrete projects and feasibility studies aimed at building the SEC’s internal capacity to maintain voter register have not been yet developed.
While the SSO processes the information related to the voter register and extracts the voter lists, the SEC oversees the voter registration process and coordinates the activities on obtaining information from other institutions tasked with providing information to update the voter register.
In terms of providing data for the update of the voter register, the SEC provides to the SSO three types of information: the first type of data relates to the information on the delineation of polling station areas defining which streets and addresses each polling station is comprised of.
The second type of data relates to the information on deceased voters collected by the SEC’s regional offices.
The third type of data relates to information on changes of personal information in the voter register requested by voters via direct application to the SEC’s regional offices.
For the 2013 municipal elections the SEC, for the first time, printed the voter lists for each polling station were provided by the SSO.
The Electoral Code defines which legally valid personal information is used for updating the voter register and the authorities responsible for providing this information.
With regard to the volume of information that each institution provides to the SSO to update the voter register, the MoI emerges as the most important provider of legally valid information.
The data provided by the MoI is based on the register of issued personal identity cards and travel documents (with biometric features) which contains all information relevant for the identity of voters (name, surname, name of one parent), vital life events (date of birth, information of deceased voters) and the place of residence (address).
Finally, the information provided by the MoI on issued personal identity cards and travel documents including on their validity directly determines who can be added to the voter lists.
The MoI is responsible for submitting    the above mentioned information to the SEC twice a year on a regular basis and on the day following the day of the calling of the election.
Apart from the information received from the MoI, the SSO also receives information on deceased voters on a permanent basis.
The information is collected by the SEC via its regional branches on the basis of the information on deceased voters submitted to the SEC regional branches by the regional registrar offices operating under the Directorate at the MoJ.
The SEC regional offices also forward the information on the persons who submitted requests to update their information in the voter register after presenting a valid identification document.
It is noteworthy that under the existing SSO procedures for processing information in the voter register, whenever information received through regular MoI updates (information on deceased voters or other personal information) is different from existing information in the register, even if information has been received through regular updates from the SEC regional offices, the newly received information from the MoI prevails.
Information on streets in the databases of the MoI and the SSO are codified meaning that each physical address is represented as a unique code.
Based on the street codes in their databases reference can be made to the existing and previous names of the street.
Central to ensuring that both institutions operate with the most recent and valid information related to street names is the information provided by the Central Register responsible for verifying legally valid street names and their corresponding codes.
REGISTERS USED FOR UPDATING THE VOTER REGISTER
a) Registration of vital life events
Registration of vital life events such as birth, death, marriage, including other relevant identity information (name, surname, parents’ names) is one of the basic sovereign prerogatives of states through which states register legally valid information pertaining to a person’s identity and on the basis of which the state recognizes the identity of physical persons including their relationships with other persons.
The registration of vital life events and relevant identity information is regulated by the Law on Personal Records which defines the Directorate under the MoJ responsible for registering, storing and updating this information.
Generally, the fundamental principle implemented by the law is that vital life events are registered in the respective register kept at the location where the event occurred, with exceptions detailed by the law.
Vital life events are recorded, in two original paper copies.
The 32 regional branches of the Directorate report on the registration to the central office on a regular basis and each of the 173 local offices report to the regional office twice per week.
Most of the registers maintained by the Directorate are paper based.
The Team was informed that the Directorate is in the process of procuring equipment which should allow for the electronic maintenance of the registers.
To that end, the Directorate is undertaking a digitalization of existing paper records where some 20 per cent of approximately nine million paper based records collected and updated since 1900 have already been entered into the electronic database.
Once complete, the database will include all information from the existing books of birth, death and marriage.
The intention of the Directorate is to complete this project by July 2015.
The Directorate does not intend to scan and to include original acts establishing the occurrence of vital life events in the database; instead, the data from the records will be transferred to the electronic database using manual data entry.
The Directorate also plans to cross check the information stored in the new database with the information on citizens stored in the database of the MoI.
The Directorate’s regional branches provide a copy of the death certificate ex-officio to: (i) the birth register at the place of birth, (ii) the marriage register at the place of the marriage, (iii) the respective regional office of the MoI and (iv) the respective regional office of the SEC at the location of the registered permanent residence.
Finally, the information is also communicated to the SSO for statistical purposes.
Although the Directorate is responsible for the registration of personal information pertaining to the identity of citizens, it does not provide this information directly to the SEC for the purpose of updating the voter register.
Instead, this information is provided by the MoI which collects information on a person’s identity in the process of issuing identification documents and biometric passports.
As part of the document issuance process, the MoI copies relevant information on a person’s identity from birth and marriage certificates issued by the Directorate.
The fact that the information on a voter’s identity is obtained through an intermediate institution (MoI) and not from the institution legally responsible for its registration (the Directorate) could lead to discrepancies in relation to the updated identity information and the identity information as reported by the MoI.
This possibility exists since the MoI will reflect the change of information on a person’s identity only when this information is reported by the person in a certified format when requesting a new personal identity card or travel document.
Such a data discrepancy is most likely to occur in cases when a person changes name or surname.
Discrepancies in data related to other vital life events such as birth and death appear unlikely as the Directorate’s regional branches communicate this information to the MoI ex-officio.
As the Directorate’s regional branches communicate registered deaths ex-officio, this information reaches the SEC through three independent channels of communication.
First, the Directorate communicates this information via the SEC regional offices.
Second, the same information is also communicated to the MoI which provides this information to the SEC at the first scheduled update of the voter register.
Third, the information is communicated directly to the SSO for statistical processing.
Consequently the information directly communicated to the SEC has value in terms of updating the voter register only in the period after the last update from the MoI was received and until the voter lists are finalized immediately before elections.
Every time the MoI submits information for updating of the voter register it already contains all information on deceased voters which was previously communicated to the SEC.
The Team was informed that the SSO conducts detailed inspections on all data inconsistencies (i.e. deaths reported by the SEC regional offices but not reported by the MoI).
It would appear that communication of registered deaths sent directly to the SSO is not used for the purpose of updating the voter register.
b) Registration of residence and issuance of a personal identity card and a travel documents with biometric features
In the context of voter registration, residence information is used to determine, on the basis of registered permanent residence, the polling station where the voting right can be exercised.
For local elections, voters’ residence addresses also determine the municipality in which a person may stand as a candidate and the municipality for which she/he has the right to vote.
Further to the registered place of residence, a possession of a valid personal identity card or travel document determines the eligibility to vote.
The MoI is responsible for keeping and updating the records for registration and de-registration of permanent and/or temporary residence of citizens, the records on issued unique personal identity numbers and the records on issued personal identity cards and travel documents.
With this comprehensive set of registers, the MoI is in possession of all personal information relevant for the identity, vital life events and place of residence of each citizen including the information on personal identity cards and passports issued to citizens including their validity.
It is noteworthy that in terms of legal authority to register personal information, the MoI is responsible only for the registration of place of residence, the unique personal identity number and the issuance of personal identity cards and travel documents.
Registration of legally valid identity information and information on vital life events is the responsibility of the MoJ which maintains separate registers where this information is stored.
In the process of registration of place of residence or the issuance of identity cards and/or travel documents, the information pertaining to one’s identity is copied by the MoI from documentary evidence on the identity (such are birth and citizenship certificates) issued by the Directorate at the MoJ.
Residence registration and documents issuance for citizens residing within the country
The registration and deregistration of permanent and/or temporary residence of citizens is regulated by the Law on Registration of Permanent and Temporary Residence of Citizens.
Article 2 of the law provides that: “Permanent residence shall be a place where the citizen has settled with the intention to permanently live there and where (s)he has ensured him/herself an accommodation.”.
Citizens who have the intention to permanently reside in the state including those temporarily residing abroad are obliged under the law to register permanent residence and to report a change of permanent residence.
When changing permanent residence persons are required to de-register from the ‘old’ permanent residence and register the ‘new’ residence within eight days.
Within a further 15 days, the MoI should adopt a decision related to the reported change of permanent residence.
Failure by the MoI to adopt a (positive or negative) decision with regard to the reported request for a change of residence, leads to the submitter having the    right to invoke a lengthy appeal administrative procedure.
Children’s permanent residence is registered, at birth and with any subsequent change of residence of their parents.
Failure to register residence in accordance with the legal framework is sanctioned by a fine in the range of EUR 100 and EUR 500, in line with Article 16 of the Law on Registration of Permanent and Temporary Residence of Citizens.
To complete residency registration, citizens have to submit documentary evidence proving the right to reside at a given property.
There are several issues that affect the accuracy of registered information in relation to the place of permanent residence.
As the registration of a place of residence, as well as the change of a place of residence, is made upon a citizen’s request, the accuracy of permanent residence information depends on timely reporting by citizens about where they actually reside.
However, once citizens complete registration of place of residence, it appears that the MoI exercises limited control in determining if over time they continue to reside at the registered place of residence and if the legal grounds on the basis of which residency was registered have ceased to exist.
The law envisages that a person failing to report an accurate place of residence will be sanctioned.
However, the MoI has no mechanism to establish if the person no longer meets the requirement to maintain his or her registered residence at a reported location.
While the law envisages a detailed procedure for appealing a decision of the MoI on the registration of a place of residence, such a procedure can be invoked only by the applicant.
At the same time, new owner(s) cannot invoke the procedure for terminating the registration of a place of residence, if they have acquired a property where a person maintains a registered place of residence or property owner(s) have terminated a lease contract with a person with a registered residence at the property.
Registration of permanent residence is closely linked with the issuance of personal identity cards and travel documents since if the person changes residence he or she also should change the identity document.
Registration of a change of place of residence for the owners of personal identity cards and travel documents means that these would also have to be changed as the residence address is printed on both documents.
Considering that obtaining new identity documents could be a lengthy process, citizens may decide to delay their reporting on a change of residence.
Registration of and documents issuance to citizens residing abroad
Citizens who reside abroad and who apply for a new travel document or to replace it must inter alia provide information on their permanent residence in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia11 despite the fact, that a citizen may have no intention to live at the declared permanent residence.
While the address of a citizen’s permanent residence would generally indicate a link between the individual and a location in-country where he or she would exercise his or her legal rights and deliver his or her responsibilities, the situation for citizens living abroad may be different.
This is particularly valid for the diaspora and their successors who are generally permanent residents abroad and quite often might also be citizens of the country where they reside.
In accordance with Article 12 of the Guidelines on the Manner of Issuance of Passports and Collective Passports for the Citizens of the Republic Of Macedonia and the Procedure for Issuance of Visas for those Passports, citizens who for any reasons remain residing abroad and who do not want to or cannot register residence on the territory of the state, shall submit the request for issuance of travel document to the Ministry of Interior according to the place of their last residence”.
However in practice, this provision may result in persons registered at a place of residence (address) where they are no longer entitled to reside.
For instance, property at the address of a lastly registered residence may no longer even exist or may have changed the owner.
Over time the issue is compounded by the fact that descendants of the person residing aboard would also have their residence registered at the last residence of their parents.
Citizens who live abroad and have a permanent residence in the state are included in the voter lists according to their last registered permanent residence and are marked on the lists by an asterisk.
Citizens who move abroad and intend to live there for more than three months should report their intention either to MoI regional offices, border check points or consular offices abroad.
In all cases, reports are submitted to the MoI.
Representatives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs informed the Team that they encounter difficulties with establishing deaths of citizens abroad especially for those citizens who permanently resettled abroad and who have no property in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
c) Address register
Permanent and temporary residence is registered at a specific address, including the name of the municipality and the town or village, the name of the street and the house number.
There is a database for the administrative division of the country maintained by the Central Register, which provides for a unique digital code for each street in towns and villages where there is an established system of streets.
There is no unique digital code for house numbers, although it would appear that the Central Register is currently developing this feature; however the unique digital code for house numbers does not include the unique street code.
The change of street names is under the authority of municipal councils.
A change of a street name affects the validity of personal identity documents and may have consequences for the processing of voter lists.
The Team was informed of isolated cases whereby street names on voters’ IDs differed from those printed on the voter lists.
There appeared to be a solution in place which provided that both the ‘old’ street name (as provided for on the personal identity document) and the ‘new’ street name were included in the voter lists.
Since the new documents have been introduced relatively recently, the difference between official street names and the street names printed on identity cards/passports appears limited to date, but with time one could expect that the discrepancy of official street names vis à vis those printed on identity cards/travel documents is likely to increase.
d) Sharing of Information between State Institutions
The Team was under the impression that while sharing of population and voter information between institutions is taking place, it does so using different levels of technology including paper flow or copying a large array of data on compact disks, rather than having direct access to data of other institutions.
The unique personal identification number is used as the sole criteria for matching personal records from different databases in the process of updating personal information in the voter register and to ensure integrity of personal information in the databases.
The unique personal identification number is also used as a unique identifier in updating information received in paper format.
Collection of biometric data stored in the MoI database ensures that each person has only one personal record to which a unique identification number is assigned and it safeguards against the creation of several records with its corresponding unique personal identification number which belongs to the same person.
A government project on the interoperability of data between electronic databases maintained by the authorities is underway.
Its main goal is to eliminate possibilities for duplication of activities of different institutions in data registration and to ensure direct access to up-to-date data by different institutions.
It is not clear when this project will yield practical results with regard to the registration of citizens and voters.
Both the MoI and the Ministry of Information Society and Administration in charge of the data interoperability project indicated that the information technology platform used by the MoI, the institution in charge of the largest amount of population and voter registration related data, was outdated and that in order to increase data interoperability the information technology of the MoI should be upgraded.
The SSO and the SEC are considered for inclusion in the data interoperability project during its second phase.
e) Authority for changing information in the voter lists
The SEC has the authority to oversee the accuracy of information in the voter register.
Article 42 (1) of the Electoral Code provides that SEC has the official duty to record, add and delete data in the Voters List, based on data from the books for registration of vital life events, registries of residence and citizenship, other official records, and through direct inspection.
This provision determines that the SEC makes amendments to the voter lists on the basis of    official records and it also gives the authority to the SEC to make amendments through direct inspection.
What direct inspection entails is not entirely clear.
The SEC appears to be operating on the premise that the recording and inclusion of additions to and deletions in the voter lists should only be done on the basis of legally valid information from civil and residency registration books.
While some SEC members acknowledged the responsibility of the SEC to amend the voter register through direct inspection, it seems that no procedures for such an inspection exist.
The Team was informed however, that often in the process of updating voter registration, and in instances where there is a discrepancy in information received from different institutions, the correct information is determined through direct inspection.
It is unlikely that the SEC can be granted the authority to amend any data in the register through direct inspection, such as door-to-door visits, without ensuring that data is legally valid.
However, a precise legal clarification on this specific provision is lacking.
The Team came to the conclusion that the SEC conducts a limited inspection of the voter lists and that not all options have been tried to exercise queries into the voter register database which could highlight potential issues with voter registration such as an unusual number of newly registered residences in certain areas in the run-up to elections or an unusually high number of residents registered at a specific address.
In the situation where the voter register is solely based on legally valid records in the civil and residence register, the information in the voter register will be as accurate as the information in the civil and residence registers.
Therefore the accuracy of voter lists is directly linked to the accuracy of civil and residence registers where the inspection of voter lists represents de facto inspection of the work done by the institutions which have provided the data.
In such circumstances, the SEC could go as far as highlighting possible issues related to the data it had received for the update of the voter register, but at the same time it cannot be held accountable for inaccurate information in the voter lists as long as it fully corresponds with data received by the relevant institutions.
ENHANCING COLLECTION AND SHARING OF THE INFORMATION IN THE FUTURE
Overall, the legal framework includes all pieces of legislation necessary to maintain an accurate record of vital life events, residence, personal identity cards and travel documents.
The authorities might consider updating sublegal acts in order to further improve the registration of permanent residence for citizens.
Requirements for the issuance of travel documents for the citizens permanently residing abroad could benefit from further review.
Possible improvements could be considered in the short-to-medium and the longer term.
Activities in the short term should aim at immediate efforts to restore public confidence, while in the long term, decisions should be made based on a broad political agreement to establish a transparent system of registration that will be implemented systematically and enjoys public trust and respect.
POSSIBLE SHORT TERM ACTIVITIES
As a confidence building measure for the public with a view to enhancing the transparency of voter registration, the SEC could design a set of queries to analyze the voter register as it stands after the 2013 municipal elections.
The analysis could be based on a set of queries searching the voter register for possible groups of multiple records.
The queries could be run on a regular basis by the SSO on behalf of the SEC.
The starting point in designing such a set could be Annex 2 (Possible Queries to Identify Potential Groups of Multiple Records) of this Report, which should not be considered as an exhaustive example.
In addition, the SEC could also design an information sheet to provide, on a regular basis, statistical information for each municipality on the numbers of newly issued personal identity cards and travel documents, new registrations and de-registrations of permanent residence, and other facts relevant to the compilation of accurate voter lists.
Consideration could also be given to regulate, by an internal SEC regulation that such queries are run on a regular basis and made public.
During the period of public scrutiny of the voter lists, the queries could be run and the results be made public on a daily basis.
Bearing in mind that such an analysis would imply inspecting the work of other institutions which are providing data in the voter registration process, consideration should be given to phasing out the requirement that the SEC inspects and is held accountable for data accuracy and to transfer this responsibility to those institutions which are responsible for providing data for updating the voter lists.
Consideration should also be given to reviewing the existing body of legal and sub-legal acts relevant to the registration of vital life events, citizenship, and permanent residence with a view to updating outdated regulations, and assessing possibilities for further harmonization of the legal framework, by taking into account the current technologies for maintaining the respective registers.
In addition, this review could also confirm that there is no duplication of efforts in transferring the information form the relevant institutions to the SEC.
Legal and practical arrangements should be made to ensure that citizens comply with the requirement to report a change of residence.
To this end consideration should be given to promoting incentives for reporting a change of residence and not to rely exclusively on sanctions.
To ensure that a registered place of residence is correct, property owners should be provided with a mechanism to challenge the registration of a place of residence at their property if a person no longer lives at their property or if the property lease contract has expired.
In terms of communicating information on deceased voters, consideration should be given to conveying this information by the Directorate directly to the SSO considering that such a channel of communication already exists.
Since the Directorate transmits this information to the MoI as well, to streamline the process of communicating information on deceased voters the regional branches of the Directorate should inform on deceased voters directly to the SSO   only in the period after elections were called, starting from the most recent voter register update received by the MoI until the cut-off date for the closing of the voter lists.
Consideration should be given to establishing specific arrangements to inform all institutions involved in the compilation of voter lists in a timely manner, ex officio, about changing names as a result of marriage or divorce, so that voter lists include both the ‘old’ and the ‘new’ name.
A change of residence implies a change of personal identity documents which may deter people to report a change of residence; as a result such persons will be on the voter lists in locations where they do not de facto live.
Personal identity cards or travel documents should be used to only establish people’s identities and the address should not necessarily be viewed as identity data.
Consideration could be given to removing the requirement that voters who live permanently abroad and exercise their rights and responsibilities where they live declare an address of permanent residence within the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
They should rather only declare the location of family origin as a proof for the link to their country of origin.
POSSIBLE ACTIVITIES IN THE LONG TERM
In the long term the Electoral Code postulates that the SEC should build its internal capacity to process the voter register to maintain voter list information.
To that end, the SEC should work on developing technical terms of reference for the implementation of such a system which should include appropriate human resources and define annual running costs before moving forward with the implementation.
The implementation of such a system could be assessed in terms of cost effectiveness of running a voter register parallel to other registers of citizens and in particular compared to the existing register maintained by the MoI or a future civil register that is yet to be established by the Directorate.
To ensure an accurate allocation of voters to their nearest polling station, consideration should be given to upgrading the database for streets and addresses maintained by the Central Register and to transform it into an address register by introducing unique digital codes at the level of house, entrance and apartment numbers.
This approach would further enhance the establishment of a unique link between the identity of a person and its geographic location.
As a consequence, the residence register would be built on the civil register which includes the identity data of all resident citizens and on the address register which would include all existing addresses.
Consideration could be given to prioritizing the inclusion of the SSO and the SEC in the data interoperability project, which currently plays an important role in the compilation of the voter lists.
It could also be considered in the future to assess the cost-effectiveness of maintaining a voter register in parallel to the registers of citizens maintained by the MoI or by the Directorate under the MoJ.
In this context, consideration could be given as to whether either of these two agencies legally responsible for the registration of personal information should also be responsible for the compilation of voter lists on the basis of information they already have, and whether political consensus for such a decision could be reached.
Such an assessment should take into account ongoing improvements in the management of personal information through the project on the establishment of electronic civil register, the creation of the technical conditions for the interoperability of digital information stored in the databases of relevant institutions, and the fact that the SEC does not have the authority to change personal information in the voter register which contradicts legally valid information.
Alternatively, it would be necessary to fully develop the capacity of the SEC to assume responsibility for the maintenance of the voter register.
ABOUT THE OSCE/ODIHR
The Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) is the OSCE’s principal institution to assist participating States “to ensure full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, to abide by the rule of law, to promote principles of democracy and (…) to build, strengthen and protect democratic institutions, as well as promote tolerance throughout society” (1992 Helsinki Summit Document).
This is referred to as the OSCE human dimension.
The OSCE/ODIHR, based in Warsaw (Poland) was created as the Office for Free Elections at the 1990 Paris Summit and started operating in May 1991.
One year later, the name of the Office was changed to reflect an expanded mandate to include human rights and democratization.
Today it employs over 130 staff.
The OSCE/ODIHR is the lead agency in Europe in the field of election observation.
Every year, it co-ordinates and organizes the deployment of thousands of observers to assess whether elections in the OSCE region are conducted in line with OSCE Commitments, other international standards for democratic elections and national legislation.
Its unique methodology provides an in-depth insight into the electoral process in its entirety.
Through assistance projects, the OSCE/ODIHR helps participating States to improve their electoral framework.
The Office’s democratization activities include: rule of law, legislative support, democratic governance, migration and freedom of movement, and gender equality.
The OSCE/ODIHR implements a number of targeted assistance programs annually, seeking to develop democratic structures.
The OSCE/ODIHR also assists participating States’ in fulfilling their obligations to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms consistent with OSCE human dimension commitments.
This is achieved by working with a variety of partners to foster collaboration, build capacity and provide expertise in thematic areas including human rights in the fight against terrorism, enhancing the human rights protection of trafficked persons, human rights education and training, human rights monitoring and reporting, and women’s human rights and security.
Within the field of tolerance and non-discrimination, the OSCE/ODIHR provides support to the participating States in strengthening their response to hate crimes and incidents of racism, xenophobia, anti-Semitism and other forms of intolerance.
The OSCE/ODIHR's activities related to tolerance and non-discrimination are focused on the following areas: legislation; law enforcement training; monitoring, reporting on, and following up on responses to hate-motivated crimes and incidents; as well as educational activities to promote tolerance, respect, and mutual understanding.
The OSCE/ODIHR provides advice to participating States on their policies on Roma and Sinti.
It promotes capacity-building and networking among Roma and Sinti communities, and encourages the participation of Roma and Sinti representatives in policy-making bodies.
All ODIHR activities are carried out in close co-ordination and co-operation with OSCE participating States, OSCE institutions and field operations, as well as with other international organizations.
More information is available on the ODIHR website (www.osce.org/odihr).
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
EARLY PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS
Scheduled for 5 June 2016
OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation Mission Final Report
THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
EARLY PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS
SCHEDULED FOR 5 JUNE 2016
OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation Mission Final Report
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Following an official invitation, on 31 March the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) established an Election Observation Mission (EOM) to observe the early parliamentary elections scheduled for 5 June.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM terminated its observation activities on 1 June, after the cancelation of elections.
The mission assessed whether the electoral process and activities conducted until that date were in line with OSCE commitments, other international obligations and standards for democratic elections and with national legislation.
Early parliamentary elections were scheduled as part of a Przino multi-party agreement designed to end political tensions stemming from the oppositions’ boycott of parliament and the release of wiretapped recordings on alleged abuse of power by senior government and public officials.
The political crisis deepened following opposition announced intention to boycott elections as key conditions of the agreement were not met.
After negotiations, the parliament postponed the early elections initially scheduled for 24 April to 5 June.
Regular demonstrations to cancel elections were organized, as well as counter demonstrations in support of holding elections.
The political climate was also impacted by President Gjorge Ivanov’s decision to issue a blanket pardon to all individuals who were charged, under investigation or suspected of involvement in the wiretapping scandal.
Of the four signatories of the Przino Agreement only the ruling party submitted candidate lists by the 11 May deadline.
Two non-parliamentary parties, which nominated lists of candidates, were rejected on technical grounds.
Many OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors argued that having an election with one contestant questions political pluralism.
Some representatives of the international community stated that any government resulting from elections in which three major parties are not participating would not be a credible partner.
On 18 May the Constitutional Court issued a restraining order against decisions of parliament that were a result of its dissolution, although it had previously decided that it did not have the competence to review two such cases.
On 25 May it declared the dissolution of the parliament unconstitutional.
Before the final court decision the parliament reconvened and voted for cancelling the 5 June elections.
The government returned to its composition prior to the Przino Agreement.
Although some measures to prevent intimidation and pressure on citizens were taken by the authorities, a climate of intimidation was frequently alleged by many OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors.
Several of them attributed this to a fear of retribution existing in state companies and institutions.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM received credible allegations of pressure on public sector employees to attend counter-demonstrations, including threats of termination of employment.
This raised questions about voters’ right to cast their vote free of fear of retribution, as provided by paragraph 7.7 of the 1990 OSCE Copenhagen Document.
Elections are primarily regulated by the Constitution and the Electoral Code.
In November 2015 the parliament adopted a significant number of amendments to the Electoral Code.
These amendments attempted to address most of the prior OSCE/ODIHR recommendations.
However, a number of OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors stressed the equal importance of full implementation of the Code.
The late changes negatively affected electoral stakeholders’ understanding of new provisions and impacted on their ability to fulfil their functions.
While the amendments represent an effort to improve the Code, OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors uniformly opined that the Electoral Code would benefit from a full review due to its internal inconsistencies and lack of coherence.
Between 120 and 123 members of parliament (MPs) are elected under a proportional representation system from closed lists.
Of these, 20 MPs are elected in each of the 6 in-country electoral districts.
As a result of the 2015 amendments to the Electoral Code, up to three MPs can be elected from a single out-of-country district.
Due to insufficient number of voters registered abroad, the out-of-country voting was cancelled, effectively disfranchising a number of voters.
Elections  are  managed  by  a  three-level  election  administration,  headed  by  the  State  Election Commission (SEC).
The 2015 amendments changed the SEC’s composition and increased its competences to include maintenance of the voter register.
The SEC worked in a very tense political environment and under criticism from the opposition and many  civil  society  organizations,  who  were  against  holding  elections  on  5  June.
It  met  the administrative deadlines and held regular meetings.
Despite a legal obligation to meet publicly, the SEC conducted two closed official sessions and regularly also held “working sessions” closed to public.
Its decisions were not systematically published on its website, diminishing the transparency of its work.
In addition, sessions of the SEC were boycotted by two opposition members.
While the SEC regional offices appeared to be staffed with experienced employees, local election officials  seemed  to  lack  any  decision-making  power, and many  complained  about  the  shortage  of necessary  resources  and  insufficient  support  and  direction  received  from  the  headquarters.
Moreover, the reappointment of members of Municipal Election Commissions was done during the electoral process, which impacted their work, including the formation of Electoral Boards.
The  current  system  of  voter  registration  based  on  personal  identification  number  can  ensure accuracy of voter lists and provide sufficient safeguards against fraud and double registration if implemented consistently and correctly.
While the SEC made significant efforts to timely conduct the updating the voter register by cross-checking the databases and field verifications, the process proved complex, methodologically challenging as well as requiring major resources.
The process was criticized by OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors for being chaotic, methodologically unsound and at times inadequately addressing prior allegations of fraud.
The  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  was  informed  about  a  number  of  examples  of  alleged  existence  of fictitious  voters  and  other  irregularities.
While  many  allegations  proved  to  be  false,  or  they pertained to registration errors which had already been corrected, instances of voters registered at non-existing addresses were noted, which can indicate either registration fraud or administrative error.
Addressing these allegations, the MoIA announced that as of 31 March 2016 there were 2,464,925 citizens in the population register, including 1,956,518 of voting age.
The progress report on updating voter lists issued by the SEC on 26 April did not reveal evidence of voter registration fraud.
The media environment is divided along ethnic lines and is characterized by a high number of media  outlets  operating  in  a  limited  advertising  market.
A  number  of  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM   interlocutors raised concerns regarding the deterioration of media freedom due to political pressure and owners interfering in the work of journalists.
Some opined that the government selection of the broadcasters for advertising is a reward for favourable coverage and editorial policy.
The  legal  framework  for  the  coverage  of  elections  was  substantially  amended;  however,  the majority of OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors highlighted the need for more substantial reform.
As part of the Przino Agreement, consultations between the four political parties and civil society organizations  were  held  to  further  reform  the  media  landscape,  but  draft  amendments  were dismissed by the parliament in April.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM media monitoring indicates that the newscasts of MRT-1 provided limited information  about  political  events  and  avoided  comprehensive  reporting  in  their  daily  news coverage.
In several cases, MRT-1 journalists mixed facts with their own political opinions when covering the news.
The most popular private TV stations, Sitel and Kanal 5, together with Alfa, displayed a unified approach in the news coverage with exclusively positive and neutral towards the ruling  party  and  negative  towards  the  main  opposition  party.
Telma  and  cable-only  Vesti  24 provided more balanced and in-depth coverage of the news.
The 2015 amendments to the Electoral Code adjusted the deadlines for hearing and deciding on electoral complaints and mandated that all hearings by administrative bodies be open to the public.
Despite  a  constitutional  requirement  to  hold  public  court  sessions,  the  Administrative  Court operated in a non-transparent manner, and reviewed the two election-related cases without holding a public hearing.
In addition, lack of permanent guidelines on the complaints process undermines the effectiveness of the means of legal redress that is required by paragraph 5.10 of the 1990 OSCE Copenhagen Document.
INTRODUCTION AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Following an official invitation, and based on the recommendation of a Needs Assessment Mission conducted from 2 to 5 November 2015, the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights  (OSCE/ODIHR)  established  an  Election  Observation  Mission  (EOM)  on  31  March  to observe  the  early  parliamentary  elections  scheduled  for  5  June  2016.
The  EOM,  headed  by Ambassador Jan Petersen, consisted of a 12-member core team based in Skopje and 24 long-term observers (LTOs) deployed throughout the country from 13 April.
Mission members were drawn from 21 OSCE participating States.
With the cancellation of the elections on 18 May, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM ended its observation activities on 1 June.
The mission, however, assessed whether the electoral process and activities conducted until that date were in line with OSCE commitments, other international obligations and standards for democratic elections and with national legislation.
This final report follows two Interim Reports.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM wishes to thank the authorities for the invitation to observe the elections, as well as the State Election Commission (SEC), the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and other state and local authorities for their support and co-operation during the course of the EOM.
The mission  also  wishes  to  express  its  appreciation  to  the  OSCE  Mission  to  Skopje, other  international organizations  and  embassies  accredited  in  Skopje,  as  well  as  political  parties,  civil  society organizations and media representatives for their co-operation and support.
POLITICAL CONTEXT
Early parliamentary elections were scheduled as part of the Przino Agreement signed on 2 June 2015 and its Protocol from 15 July, which were designed to end political tensions stemming from the oppositions’ boycott of parliament and the release of wiretapped recordings on alleged abuse of power by senior government and public officials.
This agreement, concluded between the four major parties – the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization – Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity (VMRO-DPMNE), the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM), the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI), and the Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA), was facilitated by the European Commission (EC).
The early elections were initially scheduled for 24 April 2016.
In January 2016, the SDSM announced that they would not participate in the elections, maintaining that key Przino Agreement conditions had not been met, specifically cleaning of the voter register, media  reforms,  and  separation  of  state  and  party  activities.
On  23  February,  the  parliament approved a DUI motion to postpone the dissolution of the parliament and on 15 April the parliament speaker re-scheduled elections for 5 June.
The political climate deteriorated after 12 April, when President Gjorge Ivanov issued a blanket pardon to all individuals who were charged, under investigation or suspected of involvement in the wiretapping scandal.
All of the major political parties condemned the pardon and called on the president to rescind his decision.
The pardon triggered protests and counter protests.
United under the  Protestiram  umbrella,  the  demonstrators  called  for  the  resignation  of  the  president  and cancelation of elections.
While the Protestiram representatives stated their political independence, VMRO-DPMNE claimed that the protests were orchestrated by SDSM.
Counter-demonstrations  organized  by  Civil  Movement  for  Defense  (GDOM)  supported  the  government  position  by maintaining that elections be held on 5 June.
Although some measures to prevent pressure on citizens were taken by the authorities, such as political statements and establishing hot-lines, a climate of intimidation was frequently alleged by many OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors, and several of them attributed this to a fear of retribution existing  in  state  companies  and  institutions.
While  no  official  complaints  were  filed,  the OSCE/ODIHR EOM received credible allegations of pressure on public sector employees to attend the counter-demonstrations, including threats of termination of employment.
This raises questions about voters’ right to cast their ballot free of fear of retribution as provided by the 1990 OSCE Copenhagen Document.
Citizens, including public or state employees, should not be subject to pressure or intimidation.
Authorities  should  actively  encourage  citizens  to  report  any  cases  of  pressure,  supported  by verifiable  evidence.
Any  instances  and  allegations  of  pressure  and  intimidation  should  be thoroughly and effectively investigated and prosecuted by authorities.
The pre-campaign period was characterised by an exchange of harsh rhetoric between the main political parties, particularly between VMRO-DPMNE and SDSM.
VMRO-DPMNE maintained that holding early elections was the only way out of the political crisis while for the SDSM implementation of the Przino Agreement was the priority before any elections could take place.
On 9 April, SDSM and 17 smaller parties signed the Platform for a Democratic Macedonia, calling for the implementation of the Przino Agreement and announced a boycott of elections.
The DUI and DPA eventually stated that they stood for inclusive elections with all parties running.
Most parties were waiting for an increased involvement of the international community in resolving the crisis.
After negotiations, no political agreement was reached, and of the four parties signatories of the Przino Agreement only VMRO-DPMNE submitted candidate lists on 11 May, and eventually was the only registered electoral contestant.
Many OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors argued that having an election with one contestant questions political pluralism.
On 17 May, a European Commission representative stated that they “do not see that the minimum conditions  to  enable  credible  elections  on  5  June  2016,  which  could  be  recognized  by  the International Community, are met” and that “any government resulting from elections in which three major parties are not participating would not be a credible partner for the International Community”.
On 18 May, the Constitutional Court heard a DUI petition, submitted on 15 May, seeking to declare the dissolution of parliament unconstitutional.
The petition argued that elections could only be held within 60 days from the day of the dissolution of the parliament.
In a unanimous decision, the court issued a restraining order against the decision on the dissolution of the parliament, including the speaker of the parliament’s announcement of elections for 5 June.
The campaign period and all election-related activities were suspended until the court decided on the underlying petition or lifted the restraining order.
Before the final court decision, the parliament convened on 18 May and voted unanimously to remove from the Electoral Code the date of 5 June as the designated election day.
No new date was set for the elections.
On 25 May, the Constitutional Court granted the DUI petition and declared the dissolution of parliament unconstitutional, thereby nullifying the decree of the speaker calling elections for 5 June.
Previously the court rejected the similar case twice for lack of their competency  on  the  matter.
Several  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  interlocutors  claimed  that  the Constitutional Court decision was influenced by the political developments.
At the session on 18 May, the parliament approved the resignations of the SDSM ministers that had been submitted on 6 April, and replaced them with representatives of the ruling VMRO-DPMNE coalition.
The SDSM and DPA stated that the Przino Agreement was violated, as the establishment of the interim government was one of its provisions.
The parliament also amended the Law on Pardon to allow for the president to revoke previously given pardons, which the president did on 6 June.14 A number of opposition representatives initiated a procedure to impeach President Ivanov on grounds of violating the constitution when granting the pardons.
On 21 June the parliament failed to achieve the two thirds majority needed to pass the initiative.
LEGAL FRAMEWORK
Elections are regulated by the Constitution and the Electoral Code, supplemented by regulations promulgated by the SEC.
The Electoral Code was adopted in 2006 but has since then been substantively amended.
Following the Przino Agreement, a working group was created with the participation of VMRO-DPMNE, SDSM, DUI and DPA.
The group reached consensus on electoral reform and on 9 November  the  parliament  adopted  a  significant  number  of  amendments.
The  amendments attempted to address most of the prior OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, particularly those related to the principle of equal suffrage for out-of-country voting, the composition and competences of the SEC, level playing field in terms of media coverage during the election period, strengthening party and campaign finance reporting and auditing, improving safeguards for the separation of party and state, introducing deadlines for courts to decide on electoral disputes and clarifying the definition of campaigning and campaign period.
Voter photographs on voter lists and the marking of voters’ thumbs with ink were introduced as possible safeguards against multiple voting.
While  the  amendments  represent  an  effort  to  improve  the  Electoral  Code,  a  number  of OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  interlocutors  opined  that  the  late  changes  negatively  affected  electoral stakeholders’ understanding of provisions and their ability to fulfil their functions.
For example, very few stakeholders were aware of or understood the new provisions on political advertising using posters, billboards and advertising panels.
In addition, the provisions on early campaigning were not effective as the definition of electoral contestants who cannot campaign is limited to those who are confirmed as candidates by the SEC, which  does  not  occur  until  just  before  the  campaign  begins.
Provisions  on  the  registration procedures for out-of-country voters also need to be clarified in order to ensure enfranchisement of all eligible voters.
OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors uniformly opined that the Electoral Code would benefit from a complete review.
They also stressed that full and effective implementation of the Code is of equal importance.
The Electoral Code would benefit from a complete review in order to harmonize it internally and with other relevant laws.
The review should be conducted after consultations between all political stakeholders and relevant civil society organizations.
It should be completed well in advance of the next elections.
Training for electoral staff and public awareness programmes should be undertaken to enhance the effective implementation of the Code.
ELECTORAL SYSTEM
Between 120 and 123 members of parliament (MPs) are elected under a proportional representation system from closed lists.
Of these, 20 MPs are elected in each of the 6 in-country electoral districts.
As a result of the 2015 amendments to the Electoral Code, up to three MPs can be elected from a single out-of-country district.
The new system of out-of-country voting was an attempt to balance the votes of in-country and out-of-country voters.
On 13 May, the SEC cancelled the out-of-country voting as it considered that insufficient number of citizens had registered to vote.
The decision effectively disfranchised all registered out-of-country voters, as the SEC made no alternative provision for them to exercise their right to vote.
If the current out-of-country voting system is maintained, alternative provisions should be made for voters to exercise their right to vote if voting abroad is cancelled.
On 13 May, the SEC sent a letter to the Minister of Justice and the speaker of parliament notifying them that three of the six in-country districts had a greater deviation in the number of voters than  the 5 per cent allowed by the Electoral Code.
In December 2015, the SEC had previously notified these institutions about this inconsistency but no action was taken to change the districts before parliament was dissolved in April.
The Electoral Code does not include a procedure for setting district boundaries or criteria by which they should be drawn, which is contrary to international good practice.
The Code assigns a specific number of polling stations to each district.
Moreover, the law obliges the SEC to divide polling stations with more than 1,000 registered voters prior to an election, therefore the list of polling stations included in the Electoral Code would not always be accurate.
To ensure equality of the vote, legislation could foresee periodic review of district boundaries by an independent  body.
When  district  boundaries  are  redefined,  it  should  be  done  in  a  timely, transparent, impartial and inclusive manner.
ELECTION ADMINISTRATION
The three-level election administration comprised the SEC, 80 Municipal Election Commissions (MECs) and some 3,480 Electoral Boards (EBs).
The SEC was supported by its 34 regional and local offices.
The  SEC  is  responsible  for  the  overall  conduct  of  the  elections.
MECs  are  responsible  for overseeing the electoral process in each municipality, appointment and training of EBs, tabulation and announcement of municipal results, as well as other technical preparations under the guidance of the SEC.
EBs are responsible for the conduct of election day procedures at polling stations.
Following the Przino Agreement, the composition of the SEC was enlarged from seven to nine members.
In addition to six parliamentary party representatives nominated by the governing parties (VMRO-DPMNE – 2 and DUI – 1) and the opposition (SDSM – 2 and DPA – 1), the commission also included three independent experts not affiliated with any political party.
The new SEC was appointed for a five-year term by the parliament on 16 December 2015, five months later than called for in the Przino Agreement.
The SEC president and his deputy were elected from among the non-partisan members.
In line with previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, the SEC resources were strengthened by recruiting additional personnel in the legal department and IT section as well as in some regional offices.
However, these are all temporary positions until 31 December 2016.
To ensure sustainability of the SEC administrative capacity, all necessary support positions should be permanent, based on open and competitive recruitment.
The main focus of the SEC was on reviewing the voter register.
After the calling of elections, the SEC began administrative preparations by adopting an electoral calendar with legal deadlines, many of which were shortened because of early elections, as well as an operational budget.
The SEC met the legal administrative deadlines and held regular public sessions.
However, the transparency of its work was diminished when it met in closed working sessions, not accessible to observers and media.
However, no decisions were adopted in such meetings.
Moreover, the SEC held two formal closed sessions, where decisions on changes in the appointments of MECs and some technical issues were adopted.
In addition, nearly all SEC decisions adopted since March 2016 were not published on their website, contrary to the SEC Rules of Procedures.
Such lack of transparency is at odds with international standards and good practice.
As required by law and in order to increase transparency and public confidence in its work, all SEC sessions should be open to public; all SEC decisions should be published on their website without delay.
The SEC worked in a tense political environment and under criticism from the opposition and some civil society organizations who were against holding elections on 5 June.
On 15 April, when election day was called, the commission voted with six votes in favour that they are “lawfully, conscientiously and transparently ready to conduct all electoral activities”.
The SEC president and the two SDSM representatives left the meeting without voting and the SDSM representatives did not return to sessions until 13 May.
While the SEC regional offices appeared to be staffed with experienced employees, local election officials seemed to lack any decision-making power and many of them complained about the shortage of necessary  resources  and  insufficient  support  and  direction received from the headquarters.
The widespread  expectation of cancelation or postponement of 5 June elections impacted on the level of engagement of election officials.
Each MEC is composed of a president, four members and their deputies randomly selected from among employees of the public administration with university education for a five-year term.
EBs comprise a president and two members (and their deputies) are randomly selected from among employees of public administration and the remaining two members are nominated by political parties, one from the ruling political parties and one from the opposition.
As the five-year mandate of the MECs expired on 28 April, the SEC appointed new MEC members through a random selection computer programme.
As a result of such selection, the civil servants were appointed to MECs without prior consultations and at times against their will.
More than 50 of the 800 MEC members requested the SEC to cancel their selection quoting health reasons, political party affiliation or lack of necessary education.
The MEC appointment was not harmonized with the calendar of deadlines for the 2016 elections, as it happened during the electoral period.
There was no time left for the new members to receive any training before commencing their duties, contrary to international good practice.
In addition, due to the poor communication between the SEC and MECs, many of the new members were not aware of their appointments to MECs for several days.
The establishment of many MECs was further delayed by allocating inadequate resources, including office space and computers.
As a result of such delays, none of the EBs were appointed either by the legal deadline of 6 May or by the cancelation  of  election  activities  on  18  May.
The  VMRO-DPMNE  was  the  only  party  that submitted its list of representatives to the EBs.
Consideration should be given to establishing and ensuring a more efficient communication and support from SEC to local election management bodies.
Comprehensive and standardized training for SEC local officials and MEC members should be undertaken before new elections are called.
The local offices should be provided with the necessary resources for conducting their work in a timely and effective manner.
The Electoral Code provides for equitable representation of ethnic groups and each gender in election administration bodies.
Of the nine SEC members, two are women and three are ethnic-Albanians.
Positively, some 47 per cent of MEC members are women.
In 22 MECs the required number of ethnic-Albanian members was ensured.
In three MECs ethnic-Turks were represented while ethnic-Serbs and Roma were represented in one MEC each.
VOTER REGISTRATION
Voter registration is passive, with the exception of voters temporarily residing abroad who must actively register.
Voting rights are granted to all citizens over the age of 18 years with a registered residence in the country who have a valid national identification documents or a biometric passport.
The accuracy  of the voter register,  and subsequently of the voter lists, was one of the most contentious issues in the political crisis.
The OSCE/ODIHR has previously recommended clear, co-ordinated, and transparent procedures for all institutions involved in updating the voter lists.
The 2015 amendments to the Electoral Code granted the SEC the sole responsibility for maintaining the voter register based on data extracted mainly from the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MoIA), while the  MoIA  maintained  control  over  the  databases  of  unique  personal  identification  numbers, residence registration and the records on personal identification documents issued to citizens.
UPDATE OF THE VOTER REGISTER
In February 2016, as per its adopted methodology, the SEC started updating the voter register by cross-checking the databases of 11 state institutions, as well as by conducting field verifications.
All OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors stated that this process proved operationally complex and methodologically challenging, as well as requiring major financial and human resources.
At the start of the process, the SEC searched for inconsistencies in the databases and analysed records that could indicate possible irregularities, such as deceased persons on the lists, large number of voters registered at the same address or voters with similar names and dates of birth.
Out of approximately 1.8 million voters, over 300,000 voters were identified as needing clarification of their  status.
Some  220,000  records  of  voters  were  forwarded  for  verification  to  several  state institutions.
As a result of data crosschecking, the SEC published a list of 89,000 citizens whose registration records were to be confirmed during field visits at voters’ residence.
Between 28 March and 5 April, over 550 SEC representatives visited the households of some 87,000 voters and filled out questionnaires.
The field checks confirmed 47,560 records (the voters concerned were met in person) and 39,792 records were forwarded for additional administrative checks to the MoIA and the Ministry of Justice.
Subsequently, nearly all of those records were established to be accurate.
While the SEC made significant efforts to conduct the field verification, which was also aimed to increase public confidence, alleged irregularities, such as fictitious voters and other fraudulent practices, were still being used as one of the main arguments for the postponement of the elections.
The supporters of this idea criticized the process for being chaotic, methodologically unsound and at times inadequately addressing prior allegations of fraud.
Between March and May 2016, the SEC submitted to the MoIA 45 written requests for data verification.
Many of the MoIA responses were signed only by the deputy minister, as the minister, representing SDSM, refused to do so arguing that more time was needed to conduct accurate checks.
The SDSM representatives in the SEC questioned the legality of such documents, but the SEC decided to accept them.
The interior minister also requested the SEC to remove some 130,000 voters who possess a passport but not a valid identification document to prove the residence.
The SEC rejected this request on the ground that law provides for registration of voters with either a valid identification card or a passport.
One of the most important SEC requests to the MoIA pertained to 73,000 voters identified by SEC as requiring confirmation of their residence status.
While MoIA formally confirmed the legality of these records, many OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors questioned whether this verification was done scrupulously.
One of the main examples of concerns about registration irregularities was the so called “Pustec voters” – the citizens living in the Republic of Albania whose voter eligibility was in question because of unclear residency status.
These persons were allegedly added to the voter lists in Skopje Centar municipality to influence the outcome of local elections.
According to the MoIA, in January 2016 a total of 349 identification cards of these persons were cancelled for not having the right to register residence at specific addresses.
Allegations  of  fictitious  records  in  the  voter  register  persisted,  as  many  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM stakeholders claimed that the total number of voters was suspiciously high based on the number of citizens as per the 2002 census.
Inaccuracy in the voter lists was also used by many OSCE/ODIHR interlocutors as an argument for postponing elections.
Addressing these allegations, and upon a SEC request, the MoIA announced that as of 31 March there were 2,464,925 citizens in the population register, including 1,956,518 over 18 years and some 150,000 without residence or valid identification document.
In addition, the last progress report on updating voter lists issued by the SEC on 26 April did not reveal evidence of voter registration fraud.
Almost all of the 300,000 records initially identified by SEC as questionable were validated.
Minor changes were made, mainly by removing over 1,100 deceased persons identified during electronic data crosschecks.
PUBLIC INSPECTION OF THE VOTER LISTS
The public inspection of preliminary voter lists for the 5 June elections was conducted between 25 April and 9 May  at SEC’s 34 regional and local offices.
Voters could check their own data electronically but not the data of other citizens as required by the Electoral Code.
The system of public verification was more cumbersome for those without access to internet and those who live in rural areas.
The inspection process was not implemented uniformly across the country – while in some offices voters could check their data by their personal identification number, in others this was possible also by name, address and polling station number.
Only 4,716 voters verified the accuracy of their data.
As of 17 May, there were 1,804,348 registered voters on the voter lists.
The SEC had to remove on 30 March the voter lists from the website due to a decision of the Directorate for Personal Data Protection prohibiting the publication of personal data of voters including name, gender, address, date of birth and polling station number.
The lack of possibility for voters to  check the voter lists during this time impacted the transparency  and the public confidence in the quality of voter lists.
To increase public confidence and provide easier access of voters to verify voter lists, consideration could be given to displaying printed excerpts  of voter lists at locations convenient to voters, possibly at polling stations.
The  OSCE/ODIHR EOM was  informed  about  a  number  of  examples  of  alleged  existence  of fictitious voters (so called “phantom voters”) and other irregularities.
The EOM followed up on a randomly selected sample of such irregularities; while many of the checked allegations proved to be false or pertained to registration errors which had already been corrected, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM confirmed  instances  of  voters  registered at non-existing addresses,  which can indicate  either registration malpractice or administrative errors.
On 14 May, the SEC shared the voter lists with the four largest political parties who had five days to request any changes.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM is not informed of any requests made by political parties by the 22 May deadline.
On 26 May, the SEC published the entire voter list on its website, ensuring broad public access to registration  data  as  the  lists  could  be  checked  by  personal  identification  number,  names  and addresses.
Voters  could  apply  for  any  changes  in  person  at  the  local  offices  of  SEC.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM is not informed of any challenges made by voters or other stakeholders.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM noted the ongoing discussion on replacing the existing passive voter registration  system  with  an  active  registration  system  as  a  means  to  prevent  the  alleged irregularities.
Some OSCE/ODIHR interlocutors, however, argued that active registration is costly, time consuming and likely to disenfranchise voters unable to visit registration centers for personal reasons, such as disability or living abroad.
The  current  system  of  voter  registration  based  on  personal  identification  number  can  ensure accuracy of voter lists and provide sufficient safeguards against fraud and double registration if implemented consistently and correctly.
While the MoIA is responsible for the accuracy of records, it is also critical that citizens inform the relevant authorities of any changes in their personal data and residency in a timely matter, as required by the law.
The SEC and MoIA should continue the process of updating of voter register though a co-ordinated effort according to clear responsibilities and procedures.
Adequate resources and time should be allocated to accomplish this task before the next elections.
This process should be transparent and ensure  access  to  political  parties  and  civil  society.
It  should  be  accompanied  by  a  public information  campaign  in  order  to  increase  the  citizens’ confidence  in  the  accuracy  of  voter registration.
CANDIDATE REGISTRATION
Any eligible voter can be a candidate for parliament, except those who have been sentenced by a final court decision to more than six months imprisonment and have not completed their sentence.
The  law  also  identifies  a  range  of  government  and  government-related  positions  that  are  incompatible with candidacy.
In addition, MPs cannot work in state administration bodies or engage in business or other profitable activity.
Candidates can be nominated by political parties, coalitions of political parties, or by groups of voters.
Lists  submitted  by  groups  of  voters  are  required  to  provide  at  least  1,000  supporting signatures of voters residing in the  respective  district.
In line with a  previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendation, a voter could sign in support of more than one prospective contestant.
However, contrary to a prior OSCE/ODIHR recommendation, signatures must still be collected in front of a regional  SEC  representative.
According  to  several  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  interlocutors,  the requirement to visit a SEC office may have a dissuasive or intimidating effect on some voters, especially in smaller communities.
As previously recommended, consideration could be given to providing alternative methods for signature collection in order to reduce the potential for intimidation.
By the 11 May deadline, the SEC received three candidate lists.
Of the four major parliamentary parties, only the VMRO-DPMNE coalition submitted lists.
The lists respected the new Electoral Code provision requiring that at least 40 percent of candidates must belong to the less represented gender.
Two non-parliamentary parties, the National Movement for Macedonia (NMM) and the Social Democratic Party of Macedonia (SDP), also nominated candidates.
No independent lists were submitted.
The SEC accepted the VMRO-DPMNE lists on 12 May and returned the other two parties lists for correction of deficiencies.
On 15 May, the SDP withdrew its lists and the SEC rejected the NMM lists for failure to correct the identified deficiencies.
To avoid any confusion and the rejection of candidate list for technical reasons, all specific documents required for each list could be enumerated in the Electoral Code.
The candidate registration process concluded with only one registered contestant, a situation which the Electoral Code does not specifically regulate.
A review of the Electoral Code could consider including provisions to regulate the situation where only one electoral contestant is running for parliamentary elections.
CAMPAIGN FINANCE
The Electoral Code regulates the financing of election campaigns.
All campaign-related donations and expenditures must go through a dedicated bank account.
Eligible private persons are allowed to donate up to the equivalent of EUR 3,000 in MKD, while legal entities may donate up to an equivalent of EUR 30,000.
Foreign or anonymous donations, as well as those from state-owned,  religious and charitable organizations, are prohibited.
Discounts given by media outlets to campaign participants for political advertisements are considered donations and are prohibited.
An electoral contestant may not spend more than an equivalent of EUR 1.8 per registered voter in a given electoral district.
Electoral contestants have to submit two interim and a final campaign finance reports to the SEC, State Commission for Preventing Corruption (SCPC) and the State Audit Office (SAO).
In line with previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, itemized reporting on campaign finance expenditure is now required and the SAO has been given the explicit authority to request additional explanations from contestants during the audit process.
As the elections were cancelled just two days after the campaign began, no campaign finance reports were filed.
The SAO is obligated to audit the final campaign finance reports within 60 days of submission.
If irregularities are detected the SAO initiates a misdemeanour procedure or reports the irregularities to the respective public prosecutor within 30 days of detection.
The SAO has the right to request additional explanations and data from electoral contestants.
The SAO stated to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that they were not properly resourced for carrying out supervision of campaign finance reports as they  are auditors and not investigators.
Further, they do not possess the necessary personnel to carry out monitoring of campaign finance spending in order to determine if there are irregularities.
Monitoring  and  supervision  of  campaign  finance  provisions  should  be  carried  out  by  an independent agency  that  has  the  necessary  personnel  and  expertise  to  effectively  monitor  for irregularities.
Should that be the SAO, they should be provided with the adequate powers and resources.
MEDIA
MEDIA ENVIRONMENT
The media environment is divided along ethnic lines and is characterized by a high number of media  outlets  operating  in  a  limited  advertising  market.
A  number  of  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM interlocutors raised concerns regarding the deterioration of media freedom due to political pressure and owners interfering in the work of journalists.
The OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media (RFoM) called on the authorities “to ease the pressure on media and respect free and critical voices”.
The  public  broadcaster,  Macedonian  Radio  and  Television  (MRT),  operates  three  channels nationally and is funded through a broadcast tax imposed on households and legal entities.
It is also entitled to seek and receive additional funds from the state budget.
The majority of the private broadcasters that the OSCE/ODIHR EOM met with reported minimal or no profit, and rely on the support from their owners as well as government-funded advertisements.
A number of OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors opined that the government choice of broadcasters  for  advertising  is  perceived  as  a  reward  for  favourable  coverage  and  editorial  policy.
This contradicts a recommendation made by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), which requires state institutions to treat all media that receive direct and indirect subsidies fairly and with neutrality.
In addition, the law prohibits political parties and office holders at state institutions, as well as their family members to own broadcasters.
The  allocation  of  state  advertisements  should  be  done  in  a  transparent,  objective  and  non-discriminatory manner, including by providing detailed information on the substance and funds for such advertisements.
LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE MEDIA
Coverage of the elections by media outlets is governed by the Electoral Code and the 2013 Law on Audio  and  Audiovisual  Media  Services.
The  legal  framework  for  coverage  of  elections  was substantially amended in November 2015.
It now provides detailed requirements for paid political advertisements and prohibits broadcasters and their owners to donate funds to the contestants; shortens deadlines for media-related complaints and misdemeanours procedures and increases fines for violations; prohibits the coverage of state officials that favours a political party; allows non-parliamentary parties to receive free airtime on the Parliamentary Channel and obliges MRT to host regular election debates.
The amendments also include requirements for campaign coverage by Internet portals.
Despite these amendments, the majority of OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors highlighted  a  need  for  continued  substantial  reform.
As  part  of  the  Przino  Agreement, consultations between the four political parties and civil society organizations were held to further reform  the  media  landscape,  however,  the  parties  have  failed  to  reach  a  consensus  while amendments coming from civil society organizations were dismissed by the parliament on 4 April.
The Electoral Code prohibits coverage of the regular activities of state institutions that promote political  parties  and  coalitions.
It  also  details  the  coverage  requirements  during  the  official campaign period, at times in an over-regulated manner.
The Electoral Code obliges the MRT, as well other broadcast and Internet media to cover the elections in a fair, balanced and unbiased manner providing contestants with equitable access.
By law, the balance is established on the number of candidate lists, which are officially confirmed only few days before the start of the official campaign period.
As such, a balanced coverage is not enforceable during the pre-campaign period.
In January 2016, the MRT adopted Ethical and Professional Principles of MRT for Media Coverage of  the  Election  Process,  establishing  the  general  guidelines  for  their  journalists  to  cover  the elections.
In addition, the Electoral Code provides very detailed and exact requirements for the  coverage of the campaign which results in excessive coverage of the  campaigns of the main political parties.
This may also challenge MRT’s editorial independence.
The Electoral Code also outlines detailed requirements for paid political advertisements, allowing 18 minutes per hour in total.
As the law also allows 12 minutes per hour of broadcast for commercial advertisements, a number of OSCE/ODIHR interlocutors were of the opinion that 30 minutes of advertisement per hour of broadcast is excessive.
The prices for the advertisements could not exceed the average commercial prices during the three months prior to the announcement of the elections; however, the Code does not envisage any verification of the media fulfilling this requirement.
The Agency for Audio and Audiovisual Media Services (AVMS) is the key regulator for the broadcast media.
It is legally required to monitor broadcasters and their websites from the day of the announcement of elections until the day of voting, publish weekly reports before the campaign, and publish daily reports during the campaign.
The agency has no legal power to impose sanctions directly, but can bring the identified violation to the court’s attention.
AVMS monitored only national broadcasters during the pre-campaign period.
It did not monitor Internet media stating that there was lack of a clear definition of Internet portals in the legislation, which did not allow them to establish a clear monitoring sample.
AVMS released three interim and one final reports covering the pre-campaign period.
The reports concluded that private broadcasters Alfa, Kanal 5, Kanal 5+, Sitel and Nova failed to provide objective and unbiased coverage as prescribed by the law.
The reports also concluded that the first four media listed above co-ordinated their editorial policy.
The agency took no action based on the biased coverage, while the Electoral Code sanctions such violations, no sanctions are provided by the Law on Audio and Audiovisual Media Services.
The Electoral Code could be amended to clarify the requirements for balanced reporting during the pre-campaign period.
Consideration could be given to provide AVMS with greater resources to undertake  its  oversight  role  and  sanctioning  powers  that  are  effective,  proportionate  and dissuasive.
On 13 May the AVMS forwarded to the court an initiative for a misdemeanour procedure against Alfa, Kanal 5 and Sitel for a number of reports covering activities of state institutions that were promoting  VMRO-DPMNE.
Despite  the  48-hours  legal  requirement,  the  court  did  not  issue  decision at the time of this reporting.
The AVMS also identified violations in the third monitoring period, but it did not initiate any sanctions after the elections were cancelled.
The Council of Media Ethics (CME) is a self–regulatory body that reviews complaints about media content.
On 12 February, the members of the Council signed the Charter on Ethical Reporting during Elections, pledging to report in a balanced, truthful, impartial and objective manner.
The CME did not perform any monitoring of the media nor had performed any other activities related to elections during the electoral period.
MEDIA MONITORING FINDINGS
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM conducted media monitoring of major broadcast and print media outlets during the pre-campaign period and the two days of election campaign.
The newscasts of the public MRT-1 provided limited information about political events and avoided comprehensive reporting in their daily news coverage.
The coverage of the relevant political actors was mainly factual and neutral and was largely devoted to government activities (30 per cent), VMRO-DPMNE (18 per cent) and SDSM (15 per cent).
All other political parties received marginal coverage.
In several cases, MRT-1 journalists mixed facts with their own political opinions when covering the news.
The Albanian language service of MRT-2 devoted more attention, proportionally, to the ethnic-Albanian parties, especially to DUI, which received 13 per cent of mainly neutral coverage, while SDSM and VMRO-DPMNE received each 12 per cent of same type of coverage.
Numerous talk shows served as a platform for political parties to present their views, however, there was a lack of genuine policy debate among the two major political forces – VMRO-DPMNE and SDSM.
The Electoral Code requires the public broadcaster to organize debates between the ruling and opposition parties during the campaign period.
MRT-1 attempted to organize two debates between  VMRO-DPMNE,  SDSM,  DUI  and  DPA;  however  only  VMRO-DPMNE  chose  to participate and only once.
While Telma, Vesti 24 and Alsat-M were hosting regular debates and talk shows, they stated to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that VMRO-DPMNE ignored their invitations.
The most popular private TV stations, Sitel and Kanal 5, together with Alfa, displayed a unified approach in the news coverage.
They allocated between 24 and 26 per cent of politically relevant news coverage to the activities of VMRO-DPMNE, between 21 and 27 per cent to SDSM and about 6 per cent to all other parties combined.
The tone of the coverage was almost exclusively positive and neutral towards VMRO-DPMNE, their high-level government members, as well as the counter-demonstrations organized by GDOM.
At times, the coverage of governmental activities was linked with the promotion of VMRO-DPMNE’s future policies, which is contrary to the Electoral Code.
The coverage of SDSM and of the ministers representing the party, the Special Prosecutor Office and the demonstrations organized by Protestiram was mainly  negative in tone.
The  coverage included selective presentation of the facts and opinions voiced by the journalists, many times using identical sentences on all three broadcasters.
To guarantee equitable coverage and access for all political contestants, the broadcast media should ensure balance in their news and current affairs reporting in the pre-campaign period, as required by the law.
Telma and cable-only Vesti 24 provided more balanced and in-depth coverage of the news.
Both stations devoted equitable proportions of largely neutral coverage to VMRO-DPMNE (17 and 15 per cent) and SDSM (15 and 12 per cent).
Alsat-M¸ which mainly broadcasts in Albanian language also devoted equitable proportions (between 10 and 12 per cent) of coverage to VMRO-DPMNE, SDSM and DUI, although it was largely critical of VMRO-DPMNE and neutral to other parties.
The political coverage in the print media was more polarized than broadcast media.
While Dnevnik was  clearly  biased  against  SDSM,  the  majority  of  the  political  coverage  by  Sloboden  Pecat presented VMRO-DPMNE and the government in a negative manner.
The tabloid Vest provided very  limited  political  coverage,  but  was  leaning  towards  VMRO-DPMNE.
Albanian  language newspapers Koha and Lajm were more focused on the activities of the ethnic-Albanian parties.
While Koha mainly focused on the activities and projects of DUI, Lajm was largely criticizing DUI and their members of the government.
CITIZEN AND INTERNATIONAL OBSERVERS
The Electoral Code provides for international and citizen election observation.
The citizen observer organization MOST engaged in a comprehensive monitoring of the electoral process with 80 long-term observers.
The CIVIL organization had 35 long-term observers.
On 4 May MOST filed the application for the accreditation of 27 observers to the SEC; the SEC did not grant accreditation to them before the elections were cancelled on 18 May, however, this did not hinder their observation activities.
Both CIVIL and MOST were critical of the electoral process, particularly in respect of a non-transparent field review of voter lists, misuse of state resources for party purposes, and pressure upon public administration employees.
MOST and CIVIL claimed that the government failed to provide conditions for holding credible elections.
COMPLAINTS AND APPEALS
Election-related complaints can be filed by authorized representatives of candidates, submitters of candidates’ lists, and voters.
The complaints are heard by the SEC, and its decisions can be appealed to the Administrative Court, which makes a final judgment.
The MECs do not have jurisdiction over electoral complaints.
In response to prior OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, the 2015 amendments to the Electoral Code shortened the deadlines for hearing and deciding on electoral complaints and require the SCPC to examine cases at a public session.
Decisions on complaints should be published on their websites.
Despite  the  constitutional  requirement  for  all  court  hearings  and  verdicts  to  be  public,  the Administrative Court operated in a non-transparent manner, and reviewed the two election-related cases without a public hearing.
The court informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that the judges would decide the cases in private.
The lack of guaranteed public hearings by the Administrative Court is contrary to OSCE commitments and other international standards, reducing public confidence in the process.
The Electoral Code should be harmonized with the Constitution and state clearly that all hearings on election related cases should be held in public and that decisions are made public immediately.
Of the two cases, the first one related to publishing voter lists on the SEC website.
The Directorate for Personal Data Protection issued a decision on 29 March ordering the SEC to remove the voter lists from its website as this violated the law on personal data protection.
On 9 April, the SEC appealed the decision to the Administrative Court.
Although the case was time sensitive, the court did not make a decision until 5 May and did not publish the decision until 16 May, after the deadline for public inspection of the voter lists had passed.
Due to the delay, the voters did not have the possibility to check the voter lists for irregularities as provided for in the Electoral Code.
To ensure effective remedy, all election-related cases should be decided within timely deadlines clearly stated in the law.
The second case concerned the appeal of the SEC decision rejecting the candidate list on procedural grounds submitted by the NMM.
On 17 May, the court found that in order to check the eligibility of a candidate, it was legitimate for the SEC to request copies of identification documents and criminal records.
In contrast to the Administrative Court, the Constitutional Court held public sessions when hearing the petition on the unconstitutionality of the dissolution of parliament and published its decision on the day the hearing was held.
In line with previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, the SEC established a legal department for handling complaints.
However, the SEC did not adopt an instruction for deciding on complaints and appeals, as required by the Electoral Code.
The lack of permanent guidelines on the complaints and appeals process inhibits the ability of electoral stakeholders to submit complaints, and undermines the effectives of the means of legal redress, as required by paragraph 5.10 of the 1990 OSCE Copenhagen Document.
In addition, the Electoral Code calls for the establishment of a system for case and complaint management that was not operational for these elections.
To allow effective legal remedy, the SEC should develop permanent instructions on complaints and appeals  process.
Such  regulations  could  be  harmonized  with  the  new  complaint  management system.
Telephone  hotlines  were  established  by  several  state  institutions:  the  Ministry  of  Information Society and Administration for public sector employees to report any election-related pressure; the Ombudsman  Office  for  citizens  to  report  violations  of  their  electoral  rights;  and  the  Public Prosecutor’s Office for citizens and civil society organizations to report any suspicion of criminal activity related to the elections.
According to these institutions, very few calls were received and none concerned serious violations.
The Public Prosecutor received 28 reports or complaints of which 14 were referred to the relevant basic public prosecutor’s office with instructions to act urgently and report back.
No grounds of suspicion of criminal activity were found in the remaining allegations.
The public prosecutor informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that it will keep the hotline open for reports of electoral irregularities and will continue to investigate cases that were already reported.
PARTICIPATION OF NATIONAL MINORITIES
Inter-ethnic relations remain a relevant factor in the politics of the country and political parties tend to mainly reach out to their own communities.
Inter-ethnic issues did not, however, feature prominently in the on-going political crisis, and relations among communities were not the focus of political confrontation.
Smaller communities expressed concern to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM about not being involved in international and domestic efforts to find a way out of the political crisis.
They also claimed that parties representing larger communities use administrative resources and public employment to ensure support from minorities.
Parties representing smaller communities also complained about lack of access to media.
Parties  representing  the  ethnic-Albanian  community,  and  particularly  DUI,  were  decisive  in initiating and finalising the process which led to 5 June elections being cancelled.
Other parties representing smaller communities were more divided in their position.
Those that had joined the VMRO-DPMNE-led coalition were ready to participate in the elections, while other parties stated to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that conditions for credible elections were not present and they would therefore boycott the elections.
Members of minority communities and parties representing them, particularly the ethnic-Albanians, participated in protests across the country, individually, with other communities and as part of the Protestiram movement.
In some areas, the protest had an inter-ethnic character, with symbols of the country’s  flag  and  of  the  ethnic-Albanian  and  Roma  community  displayed  together.
A demonstration organized by the Albanian Opposition Council, in which the party Levizja Besa plays a primary role, attracted a large number of supporters, advancing demands for the ethnic-Albanian community and accusing DUI of not adequately representing the community’s interests.
Almost  all  representatives  of  national  minorities,  particularly  those  of  smaller  communities, advocated to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM the introduction of a single nationwide electoral district, as well as the creation of other special measures to promote national minorities, including reserved seats.
In their view, these measures would allow parties representing smaller communities to run separately and not necessarily align with existing coalitions.
Several OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors shared their concerns that the Roma community may be susceptible  to  political  pressure  and  selling  and  buying  of  votes.
At  the  same  time,  the OSCE/ODHIR EOM was informed of numerous initiatives aimed at raising awareness within the same community, which in some cases reportedly resulted in curbing such practice.
RECOMMENDATIONS
These recommendations, as contained throughout the text, are offered with a view to enhance the conduct of elections in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and to support efforts to bring them fully in line with OSCE commitments and other international obligations and standards for democratic  elections.
These  recommendations  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  past OSCE/ODIHR recommendations, in particular from the 2014 Final Report, which remain to be addressed.
The OSCE/ODIHR stands ready to assist the authorities to further improve the electoral process and to address the recommendations contained in this and previous reports.
PRIORITY RECOMMENDATIONS
The Electoral Code would benefit from a complete review in order to harmonize it internally and with other relevant laws.
The review should be conducted after consultations between all political stakeholders and relevant civil society organizations.
It should be completed well in advance of the next elections.
Training for electoral staff and public awareness programmes should be undertaken to enhance the effective implementation of the Code.
As required by law and in order to increase transparency and public confidence in its work, all SEC sessions should be open to public; all SEC decisions should be published on their website without delay.
The SEC and MoIA should continue the process of updating of voter register though a co-ordinated effort according to clear responsibilities and procedures.
Adequate resources and time should be allocated to accomplish this task before the next elections.
This process should be transparent and ensure access to political parties and civil society.
It should be accompanied by a public information campaign in order to increase the citizens’ confidence in the accuracy of voter registration.
The allocation of state advertisements should be done in a transparent, objective and non-discriminatory manner, including by providing detailed information on the substance and funds for such advertisements.
The Electoral Code should be harmonized with the Constitution and state clearly that all hearings on election related cases should be held in public and that decisions are made public immediately.
OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS
Legal Framework
A review of the Electoral Code could consider including provisions to regulate the situation where only one electoral contestant is running for parliamentary elections.
Electoral System
If the current out-of-country voting system is maintained, alternative provisions should be made for voters to exercise their right to vote if voting abroad is cancelled.
To ensure equality of the vote, legislation could foresee periodic review of district boundaries by an independent body.
When district boundaries are redefined, it should be done in a timely, transparent, impartial and inclusive manner.
Election Administration
To ensure sustainability of the SEC administrative capacity, all necessary support positions should be permanent, based on open and competitive recruitment.
Consideration should be given to establishing and ensuring a more efficient communication and support from SEC to local election management bodies.
Comprehensive and standardized training for SEC local officials and MEC members should be undertaken before new elections are called.
The local offices should be provided with the necessary resources for conducting their work in a timely and effective manner.
Voter Registration
To  increase  public  confidence  and  provide  easier  access  of  voters  to  verify  voter  lists, consideration could be given to displaying printed excerpts of voter lists at locations convenient to voters, possibly at polling stations.
Candidate Registration
As previously recommended, consideration could be given to providing alternative methods for signature collection in order to reduce the potential for intimidation.
To avoid any confusion and the rejection of candidate list for technical reasons, all specific documents required for each list could be enumerated in the Electoral Code.
Campaign
Citizens, including public or state employees, should not be subject to pressure or intimidation.
Authorities should actively encourage citizens to report any cases of pressure, supported by verifiable evidence.
Any  instances and allegations of pressure  and intimidation should be thoroughly and effectively investigated and prosecuted by authorities.
Campaign Finance
Monitoring  and  supervision  of  campaign  finance  provisions  should  be  carried  out  by  an independent agency that has the necessary personnel and expertise to effectively monitor for irregularities.
Should that be the SAO, they should be provided with the adequate powers and resources.
Media
It is recommended to replace the legal requirement of MRT for exact amount of time in every newscast devoted to the coverage of campaign activities of individual parties with a more general requirement requiring impartiality and balance while respecting editorial independence of the public broadcaster.
To guarantee equitable coverage and access for all political contestants, the broadcast media should ensure balance in their news and current affairs reporting in the pre-campaign period, as required by the law.
Complaints and appeals
To  ensure  effective  remedy,  all  election-related  cases  should  be  decided  within  timely deadlines clearly stated in the law.
To allow effective legal remedy, the SEC should develop permanent instructions on complaints and  appeals  process.
Such  regulations  could  be  harmonized  with  the  new  complaint management system.
ABOUT THE OSCE/ODIHR
The Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) is the OSCE’s principal institution to assist participating States “to ensure full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, to abide by the rule of law, to promote principles of democracy and (…) to build, strengthen and protect democratic institutions, as well as promote tolerance throughout society” (1992 Helsinki Summit Document).
This is referred to as the OSCE human dimension.
The OSCE/ODIHR, based in Warsaw (Poland) was created as the Office for Free Elections at the 1990 Paris Summit and started operating in May 1991.
One year later, the name of the Office was changed to reflect an expanded mandate to include human rights and democratization.
Today it employs over 130 staff.
The OSCE/ODIHR is the lead agency in Europe in the field of election observation.
Every year, it co-ordinates and organizes the deployment of thousands of observers to assess whether elections in the OSCE region are conducted in line with OSCE Commitments, other international standards for democratic elections and national legislation.
Its unique methodology provides an in-depth insight into the electoral process in its entirety.
Through assistance projects, the OSCE/ODIHR helps participating States to improve their electoral framework.
The  Office’s  democratization  activities  include:  rule  of  law,  legislative  support,  democratic governance,  migration  and  freedom  of  movement,  and  gender  equality.
The  OSCE/ODIHR implements a number of targeted assistance programs annually, seeking to develop democratic structures.
The OSCE/ODIHR also assists participating States in fulfilling their obligations to promote and protect  human  rights  and  fundamental  freedoms  consistent  with  OSCE  human  dimension commitments.
This is achieved by working with a variety of partners to foster collaboration, build capacity  and  provide  expertise  in  thematic  areas  including  human  rights  in  the  fight  against terrorism, enhancing the human rights protection of trafficked persons, human rights education and training, human rights monitoring and reporting, and women’s human rights and security.
Within the field of tolerance and non-discrimination, the OSCE/ODIHR provides support to the participating  States  in  strengthening  their  response  to  hate  crimes  and  incidents  of  racism, xenophobia, anti-Semitism and other forms of intolerance.
The OSCE/ODIHR's activities related to tolerance and non-discrimination are focused on the following areas: legislation; law enforcement training; monitoring, reporting on, and following up on responses to hate-motivated crimes and incidents; as well as educational activities to promote tolerance, respect, and mutual understanding.
The OSCE/ODIHR provides advice to participating States on their policies on Roma and Sinti.
It promotes capacity-building and networking among Roma and Sinti communities, and encourages the participation of Roma and Sinti representatives in policy-making bodies.
All  ODIHR  activities  are  carried  out  in  close  co-ordination  and  co-operation  with  OSCE participating States, OSCE institutions and field operations, as well as with other international organizations.
More information is available on the ODIHR website (www.osce.org/odihr).
INTERNATIONAL ELECTION OBSERVATION MISSION
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Early Parliamentary Elections, 11 December 2016
STATEMENT OF PRELIMINARY FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
PRELIMINARY CONCLUSIONS
The 11 December early parliamentary elections were an essential step in resolving two years of deep political crisis.
The main political forces agreed to a series of legal and institutional changes to provide a level playing field for these elections.
Underlying issues, such as voter registration and media, are yet to  be  addressed  in  a  sustainable  manner.
The  campaign  was  competitive  but  took  place  in  an environment  characterized  by  public  mistrust  in  institutions  and  the  political  establishment,  and allegations of voter coercion.
The election administration struggled with the preparations for elections and missed a number of deadlines, but election day was generally well administered and proceeded without major incidents.
The  legal  framework  is  generally  conducive  for  the  conduct  of  democratic  elections.
Significant improvements to electoral legislation in 2015 addressed most previous OSCE/ODIHR and Council of Europe Venice Commission recommendations.
Additional amendments in 2016 introduced temporary mechanisms for the cross-party oversight of key aspects of the electoral process.
However, some recommendations remain unaddressed and certain provisions are ambiguous or conflict with other laws.
In addition, while the reform process enjoyed support from the four largest political parties, decisions were taken under time pressure and without consultation with relevant electoral stakeholders.
The State Election Commission’s (SEC) preparations for the elections were hampered by inefficient internal organization, politicized decision-making and shortened legal deadlines.
Several deadlines were missed and some procedures were not clarified.
SEC activities were not always transparent, as it often held closed sessions and did not always publish its decisions.
The lower-level commissions generally worked in a professional manner, although some lacked adequate premises, timely funding and equipment.
In total, 1,784,416 voters were registered.
To address longstanding mistrust in the accuracy of voter lists, for the first time the SEC reviewed the voter register by cross-checking several databases and conducting field-checks.
The review does not guarantee sustainable improvement as it applied only in these elections.
The legal and structural flaws for maintaining the voter register are yet to be addressed.
The review process improved the accuracy of the voter register, but it appears to have led to some citizens being deprived of the opportunity to vote in these elections.
The SEC registered six political parties and five coalitions for these elections.
The registration was generally inclusive, but was negatively affected by a lack of legal clarity on procedures and the rejection of candidate lists of two parties on inconsistent grounds.
In line with an enhanced quota for women’s participation, 41 per cent of candidates were women, although they topped only 4 of the 58 lists.
While fundamental freedoms were generally respected and contestants were able to campaign freely, the elections took place in an environment characterized by a lack of public trust in institutions and the political establishment.
Allegations of voter intimidation, widespread pressure on civil servants, vote buying, coercion, and misuse of administrative resources persisted throughout the campaign.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM verified a dozen of these allegations.
Such actions are at odds with OSCE commitments and Council of Europe standards.
The campaign finance regulations are comprehensive and require frequent reporting by contestants.
However, transparency is diminished by the lack of requirement to support the reports with bank statements and receipts.
Reports submitted by contestants on 1 and 10 December revealed significant overspending, particularly by the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization – Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity (VMRO-DPMNE).
The diverse media environment is split along political and ethnic lines.
Candidates could campaign on public and private media through free and paid political advertisement.
OSCE/ODIHR EOM media monitoring showed that the public media largely provided contestants with equitable news coverage.
Some of the monitored private media demonstrated bias in favor of the ruling party.
A number of interlocutors, including journalists, expressed concern about self-censorship and editorial independence due to political and business interests favouring ruling parties.
While recent amendments prohibited government-financed advertising and coverage of state officials during the campaign, significant media reforms foreseen in the Przino Agreement have yet to be implemented.
Topics related to inter-ethnic relations featured prominently in the campaign, including institutional relations between the ethnic Albanian and ethnic Macedonian communities.
The Social Democratic Union of Macedonia actively sought votes from the ethnic Albanian community, including by fielding ethnic Albanian candidates.
Media reporting of Roma candidates often used stereotypes.
Addressing a number of previous recommendations, the changes in the law and the adoption of a SEC rulebook  on  procedures  strengthened  legal  guarantees  for  dispute  resolution.
The  majority  of complaints  at  the  elections  administration  and  courts  were,  however,  rejected  on  procedural  or jurisdictional grounds.
The Administrative Court held its hearings in closed sessions.
A number of interlocutors raised concerns with respect to judicial independence.
Despite noted improvements in the law, the implementation of electoral dispute resolution procedures did not fully provide for an effective legal redress, at odds with OSCE commitments and Council of Europe standards.
Election day proceeded in an orderly manner and without major incidents, albeit with some procedural irregularities observed, particularly during the count.
Voters participated in large numbers and voting was generally assessed positively by observers.
Observers noted a number of persons not allowed to vote after having been deleted from the voter list during the recent review of the voter register.
Transparency of the electoral process benefited from the active presence of numerous citizen and party observers.
Positively, the SEC published preliminary results by polling station online throughout the night, with preliminary voter turnout at 67 per cent.
PRELIMINARY FINDINGS
Background
The 11 December early parliamentary elections were widely viewed as a crucial test for the functioning of democratic institutions, following two years of political crisis.
These elections were the fourth consecutive  early  parliamentary  elections  since  2008.
The  last  were  held  in  2014  and  led  to  a government formed by the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization – Democratic Party for Macedonian  National  Unity  (VMRO-DPMNE),  with  61  seats,  and  the  Democratic  Union  for Integration (DUI), with 19 seats.
The opposition included the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia  (SDSM) with 34 seats and the Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) with 7 seats.
The National Democratic Revival (NDR) and Citizens Option for Macedonia had one seat each.
The main opposition party boycotted the parliament, claiming that the 2014 elections were rigged.
The crisis  deepened  in  February  2015  when  incriminating  illegal  wiretapped  recordings,  allegedly implicating government and public officials in corruption, election fraud and abuse of power, led to widespread protests.
On 15 July, as part of the internationally-mediated Przino Agreement, early parliamentary elections were called for 24 April 2016 and the Office of Special Prosecutor was created to investigate the wiretapping allegations.
The elections were postponed to 5 June on the grounds that key conditions had not been met, namely cleaning of the voter register, media reforms, and safeguards to separate state and party activities.
The political climate deteriorated after 12 April, when President Gjorge Ivanov issued a blanket pardon to all individuals who were charged, under investigation or suspected of involvement in the wiretapping scandal.
All of the major political parties condemned the pardon and called on the president to rescind his  decision.
The  pardon  triggered  protests  and  counter  protests.
The  demonstrators,  under  the Protestiram umbrella, called for the resignation of the president and cancelation of elections.
The opposition boycotted the elections and, of the four signatories of the Przino Agreement, only VMRO-DPMNE submitted candidate lists.
On 25 May, the Constitutional Court declared the dissolution of parliament unconstitutional and the 5 June elections were cancelled.
The third attempt to organize elections this year followed the signing of a new agreement in July by the four  main  political  parties,  mediated  by  the  European  Union  and  United  States.
Temporary mechanisms  were  introduced  for  cross-party  oversight  of  some  aspects  of  the  electoral  process, including voter registration and media oversight.
On 17 October, the parliament was dissolved for the second time this year and elections were called for 11 December.
Electoral System and Legal Framework
A total of 120 members of parliament (MPs) are elected in-country for a four-year term, under a proportional representation system using closed lists, 20 in each of the 6 electoral districts.
As a result of the 2015 amendments to the Electoral Code, up to three additional MPs are elected in a single out-of-country district.
The number of MPs elected in the out-of-country district does not necessarily correlate to voter turnout.
The Electoral Code permits deviations of up to five per cent from the average number of registered voters for in-country districts.
On 25 October, the Unity party challenged the holding of elections at  the Constitutional Court on the grounds that electoral district 6 deviates by 5.65 per cent.
The Court did not decide on the matter prior to election day.
The legal framework is generally conducive for the conduct of democratic elections.
In a positive step, the  electoral  legislation  was  significantly  revised  in  2015  as  part  of  the  Przino  Agreement.
The amendments addressed many previous OSCE/ODIHR and Council of Europe Venice Commission recommendations, particularly those related to the principle of equal suffrage for out-of-country voting, the composition and competences of the State Election Commission (SEC), and measures for balanced media coverage during the campaign.
They also strengthened provisions for the separation of party and the state and for campaign finance reporting.
In addition, voters can now submit a complaint at any stage  of  the  electoral  process  and  the  courts  have  to  decide  on  electoral  disputes  within  shorter deadlines.
Following the July agreement, additional amendments introduced a Temporary Commission for media oversight and required citizens with “questionable” voter registration data to actively re-register for these elections.
These last provisions were applicable only to the current elections, signalling a need for continued reform to address these issues in a sustainable manner.
The 2015 amendments improved the Electoral Code, but some longstanding issues remain unaddressed, including in respect of candidate registration, withdrawal of candidates and lists, and public and periodic review of district boundaries by an independent body.
Some articles are ambiguous or conflict with other laws and rules, making their implementation uncertain.
In addition, the legal changes were approved hastily by the parliament, after a reform process that lacked transparency and meaningful consultation  with  affected  stakeholders  outside  of  the  four  main  parties,  including  relevant  state institutions, other political parties and civil society.
This is at odds with OSCE commitments.
Election Administration
The elections are administered by the SEC, 80 Municipal Election Commissions (MECs), and 3,480 Electoral Boards (EBs).
An additional 46 EBs were established in diplomatic-consular offices for out-of-country voting.
The SEC is composed of nine members: three nominated by ruling parliamentary parties, three by opposition parties, and three independent experts selected in an open recruitment.
The president and deputy are elected from among the independent members.
MECs are composed of five randomly selected civil servants and were appointed for five-year terms in April 2016.
EBs were composed of three  randomly  selected  civil  servants,  one  member  appointed  by  the  governing  parties  and  one member appointed from the opposition parties, appointed for four-year terms in November 2016.
Despite some late changes in the composition of MECs and EBs, requirements for balanced ethnic and gender representation in election commissions were broadly respected.
However, only two of the nine SEC members are women.
The SEC’s preparations for these elections were hampered by inefficient internal organization and politicized  decision-making.
Several  important  deadlines  were  missed,  but  the  preparations  were  completed by election day.
The shortened timeframe for early elections also negatively impacted the SEC’s  activities.
SEC  decisions  were  generally  adopted  unanimously.
However,  on  politically contentious  issues  members  voted  along  party  lines  and  often  engaged  in  lengthy  procedural discussions that included heated exchanges on interpretations of the law.
At times, decisions were clearly partisan.
For example, the SEC determined the order of candidate lists on the ballots by drawing lots,  but  divided  the  lists  in  two  groups  with  the  first  places  on  the  ballot  offered  to  the  four parliamentary  parties  represented  in  the  SEC.
This  discriminated  against  other  contestants, challenging  OSCE  commitments  and  Council  of  Europe  standards.
However,  no  contestant complained on the matter.
Measures to ensure SEC transparency were not always respected.
While all members, candidates and proxies were notified about relevant SEC sessions, not all decisions were published on its website, as required by law.
The obligation to publish the minutes of the SEC sessions within 48 hours was not adhered to consistently.
Although official sessions were open to observers and media, the SEC often conducted private working sessions where substantive matters to be decided in the public sessions was agreed upon in advance.
This included decisions on tendering procedures for selection of contractors for different activities.
These practices diminished the transparency of the SEC’s work.
The  lower-level  commissions  generally  worked  in  a  professional  and  transparent  manner.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM observed that some MECs lacked adequate premises and equipment at the time of visits.
A number of MECs informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that they did not receive the necessary funds in a timely manner.
The SEC conducted cascade trainings and produced an e-learning programme, manuals and videos for election commissions.
The trainings observed by the OSCE/ODIHR EOM were comprehensive and were assessed positively by the participants.
The SEC, however, did not clarify certain procedures that were not elaborated in the Code.
The lack of clarity contributed to an inconsistent implementation of procedures by election commissions on election day.
The SEC conducted a limited voter education campaign on television, social media and print media.
Civil society organizations also developed voter awareness campaigns on secrecy of vote and voter participation.
Voter Registration
Voter registration is passive, with the exception of voters temporarily residing abroad who  must actively register.
According to the Constitution, citizens 18 years old by election day are eligible to vote, unless deprived of their legal capacity by a court decision.
However, only voters with a valid identification card or biometric passport, and registered domicile, are included in the voter register.
The Electoral Code contains conflicting provisions regarding eligibility of out-of-country voters.
For the first time in these elections, voters’ photographs were placed on the voter lists.
The SEC is responsible for maintaining the voter register.
Following the Przino Agreement, and as a means to address longstanding mistrust in the accuracy of voter lists, the SEC was tasked to review the voter register by cross-checking entries against the databases of 11 state institutions, followed by field checks.
The review process was observed by the four largest parties and led to 39,502 voter records being identified as “questionable”.
These citizens were required to re-register in order not to be deleted from the register, as per a new legal requirement.
While the process improved the accuracy of the voter register, it appears to have deprived some citizens of the opportunity to vote.
On 13 November, the SEC decided to delete 28,341 records; such voters did not have the possibility of legal redress that would allow them to be added to voter lists and be able to vote on election day.
Another 171,500 voters were moved to a separate register considered to be temporarily living abroad, but they could still vote in-country at their registered address.
In addition to the possibility of verifying their registration throughout the year, voters could check and amend their registration details at SEC regional centres during a public scrutiny period, from 28 October to 11 November.
In spite of a legal requirement, the SEC regional offices did not display printed voter lists and voters who visited the offices could only check their data on SEC computers.
Voters could also check their personal data online as well as who is registered at other addresses.
According to the SEC, few of the 10,274 voters who visited the SEC offices requested corrections.
The SEC approved 20,573 and rejected 458 applications for voting abroad.
Numerous applications were submitted from the same email address, with a significant number from the same Internet Protocol addresses in Skopje, Bitola and Shtip.
Several OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors raised questions about the integrity of the process.
Some political parties informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that they assisted voters with applications.
Voters were required to declare their ethnicity, which, according to the SEC, was necessary to print electoral materials in minority languages.
On 18 November, two days after the legal deadline, the SEC provided electoral contestants with copies of the preliminary voter lists.
The SDSM requested the addition of 45 persons who recently renewed their identification cards, as well as the addition of 348 voters identified through field checks conducted by the party and the deletion of about 800 voters who were not found at their home address.
The DUI requested the addition of five voters, whose applications were delayed by regional SEC offices.
The  SEC rejected the SDSM requests and accepted the DUI request.
The SEC also approved 107 of the 120 deletions requested by a civil society organization.
On 28 November, two days after the official date for closing the voter lists, the SEC announced that 1,784,416 voters were registered to vote in-country, of which 230,122 were placed on the special list of voters considered to be temporarily living abroad.
Special lists were also created for 2,015 prisoners, 13 internally displaced persons and 325 members of out-of-country EBs.
The political agreement to review the voter register only applied for these elections.
In addition, the legal and structural flaws for  maintaining the voter  register, mainly  due to citizens registered at addresses where they do not actually live, were not addressed.
Candidate Registration
Any eligible voter can be a candidate for parliament, except those sentenced by a final court decision to more than six months imprisonment and who have not completed their sentence.
Registered political parties, coalitions of political parties, and groups of voters can nominate candidates.
The latter were required to provide at least 1,000 supporting signatures of voters residing in the respective district.
In line with a previous OSCE/ODIHR and Venice Commission recommendation, for the first time, a voter could sign in support of more than one candidate list; however, the signatures are still required to be collected in front of a SEC employee.
Candidate registration took place from 18 October to 11 November and was generally inclusive.
However, it was negatively affected by a lack of legal clarity on several aspects of nomination and registration, including signature verification and re-submission of registration documents, 27 and by SEC inconsistency in verifying the documentation.
This led to the rejection of a number of lists from the  Social  Democratic  Party  of  Macedonia  (SDPM)  and  the  People’s  Movement  for  Macedonia (NDM).
The two parties appealed the SEC decisions to the Administrative Court, which upheld the SEC decisions.
The SEC registered 6 political parties and 5 coalitions fielding a total of 1,092 candidates on 58 lists.
In line with an enhanced quota to increase women’s participation, 41 per cent of candidates were  women, although only 4 of the 58 lists were topped by women.
The SEC registered the out-of-country candidate list for VMRO-PP and two in-country lists of Levica despite not fulfilling the gender requirement.
Campaign Environment
The parties were generally able to campaign freely, and the fundamental freedoms of association, assembly and expression were respected.
The campaign took place in an environment characterized by lack of public trust in the institutions and political establishment.
Contestants campaigned through door-to-door canvassing, small scale meetings and rallies.
Billboards were visible in many municipalities from the four main parties.
However, the placing of campaign posters and banners in public places varied by municipality due to the locations not being clearly marked and some local authorities not being aware of their legal obligation to designate such places.
Rallies throughout the country were generally well attended but some audiences appeared to lack enthusiasm.
Women represented an average of 20 per cent of the audience and very few were speakers.
The  VMRO-DPMNE-led  coalition  benefited  from  public  support,  including  at  rallies,  of  senior officials from EU member states.
Social media was extensively used in the campaign, including by smaller parties.
The main campaign messages focused on the economy, youth emigration and job creation.
While the majority of contestants used positive campaigning, negative rhetoric was also noted.
The VMRO-DPMNE-led coalition used nationalistic messages and accused the SDSM-led coalition of attempting to weaken the national identity, presenting the elections as a referendum on a unitary and sovereign state.
In turn, the SDSM-led coalition accused the VMRO-DPMNE-led coalition of abusing state power and criminal activity.
The campaigns of the ethnic Albanian parties addressed only their communities.
Persistent allegations of voter intimidation, coercion, pressure on civil servants, vote buying in Roma communities  and  misuse  of  administrative  resources  negatively  impacted  the  campaign.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM verified a dozen of these allegations.
Such actions raised concerns about voters’ ability to cast their vote “free of fear of retribution”, as required by paragraph 7.7 of the 1990 OSCE Copenhagen Document.
During the campaign a number of violent incidents were observed, targeting a range of political parties.
The  campaign  within  the  ethnic  Albanian  community  was  more  intense,  with  some inflammatory  rhetoric  from  DPA,  BESA,  Alliance  for  Albanians  and  DUI.
New  wiretapped  conversations of DUI officials were posted on social media during the campaign.
Several parties claimed difficulties opening campaign offices in specific areas controlled by DUI.
Campaign Finance
Electoral contestants were required to open a dedicated bank account for campaign finance purposes.
Individuals could donate up to EUR 3,000, while legal entities could donate up to EUR 30,000.
Foreign and anonymous donations, as well as those from state-owned, religious and charitable organizations, are prohibited.
Contestants could spend a maximum of EUR 1.8 per registered voter in a district.
Lists will be reimbursed by EUR 0.25 for each vote won, provided it obtains at least 1.5 per cent of the votes cast in the district.
All  11  electoral  contestants  submitted  interim  campaign  finance  reports  on  1  and  10  December, declaring donations received and expenditures, which were published online.
The expenditures in nine reports exceeded the contributions, with VMRO-DPMNE having the highest discrepancy amounting to more than EUR 600,000 in the first report and EUR 1 million in the second.
The reports submitted by BESA and VMRO-PP contained donations that exceeded the permitted limit.
All contestants are obliged to submit final reports within 30 days from the closing of the account, which can be up to four months after the elections.
The campaign finance regulations are comprehensive and require frequent reporting by contestants.
However, transparency is diminished by the lack of requirement to support the reports with bank statements and receipts.
The State Audit Office informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that it can conduct an audit, including a cross-check of expenses at local level, but only following complaints.
Media
Numerous media, including over 130 broadcasters, operate in a relatively small market with media outlets divided along political and ethnic lines.
Substantial media reforms foreseen in the Przino Agreement have yet to be agreed upon.
The Electoral Code governs the media coverage of elections.
All broadcasters are required to provide balanced  coverage  during  the  campaign  period.
The  public  broadcaster,  Macedonian  Radio  and Television (MRT) is required to grant access to free airtime, organize debates and provide contestants with  prescribed  shares  of  news  coverage.
Amendments  in  2015  prohibit  government-financed advertising  and  coverage  of  state  officials  favouring  political  parties  during  elections.
Additional amendments in 2016, applicable only for these elections, provided for the appointment of an MRT1 editor-in-chief nominated by the opposition 100 days prior to elections (whose mandate will end on  election night), and the formation of a Temporary Commission to oversee media coverage during the pre-electoral period.
The Temporary Commission was mandated to supervise the media for more than three months prior to elections.
However, certain legal provisions were not fully harmonized with other sections of the Electoral Code, which strictly regulate the coverage of contestants only during the official 20-day campaign, creating uncertainty about its mandate.
The Commission has proposed 57 misdemeanor procedures, primarily in connection with unbalanced coverage, hidden campaigning by government officials, and paid political advertising.
Before election day, the court decided on two cases by rejecting them.
Although required by law, the AVMS did not supervise the election coverage in the electronic media, due to unclear regulations.
All electoral contestants were able to access the media for campaigning, including through free airtime in public broadcast media and paid advertising.
Some non-parliamentary parties complained about insufficient opportunities to present their messages in the media, including limits on advertisement in private  broadcast  media.
Attempts  to  organize  debates  with  all  key  contestants  were  largely unsuccessful due to refusals of candidates to participate.
Many  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  interlocutors,  including  journalists,  noted  self-censorship  and  lack  of editorial independence of media due to the political or business interests of the owners.
During the campaign, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM was informed of one case of alleged intimidation of a news editor by a DUI representative.
Interlocutors also raised concerns about the use of government-financed media campaigns (on hold during the electoral period) as a way to sustain and reward friendly outlets.
The  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  media  monitoring  results  showed  that  both  public  television  channels complied with the regulation on distribution of coverage between the groups in the campaign period.
In MRT1 news programmes, the VMRO-DPMNE-led coalition and DUI received 20 per cent of coverage each, while the opposition parties were allocated 42 per cent, and non-parliamentary parties 11 per cent.
On MRT2, the distribution of coverage between governing and opposition parties was similarly  equitable,  with  more  time  dedicated  to  the  ethnic  Albanian  parties.
MRT1  and  MRT2 portrayed the competitors overall in a positive and uncritical manner.
The private Sitel, Kanal 5 and Alfa failed to provide balanced and impartial coverage in their news.
Although they allocated equitable portions of airtime mainly to VMRO-DPMNE and SDSM, the former was very positive in tone and the latter was often negative, in particular on Sitel.
All three channels were openly supporting the ruling party and focusing on VMRO-DPMNE campaign topics.
Dubious information originating from Internet was occasionally presented as political news on these channels.
Other private channels, Alsat-M, Telma and 24 Vesti, offered diverse and frequently critical coverage of the main contestants and political actors in their news programmes, and also granted to contestants  opportunities  to  present  their  platforms  in  debates  or  interviews.
Monitored  newspapers  overall provided variety of views, while leaning towards particular parties.
Participation of National Minorities
Parties  and  coalitions  primarily  representing  the  ethnic  Albanian  community  ran  independently, whereas  parties  and  candidates  representing  smaller  communities  joined  coalitions  led  by  parties representing larger communities.
Both the SDSM-led and VMRO-DPMNE-led coalitions included in their lists representatives of almost all smaller communities, some in likely winnable positions.
As in the past, the majority of parties representing smaller communities ran under the VMRO-DPMNE-led coalition.
The  SDSM-led  coalition  actively  sought  votes  from  the  ethnic  Albanian  community, including by fielding ethnic Albanian candidates in winnable positions, which unfortunately was not well received by established ethnic Albanian parties.
Topics related to inter-ethnic relations featured prominently in the campaign, including institutional relations between the ethnic Albanian and Macedonian communities and the official use of languages.
The electoral contest was particularly competitive in the ethnic Albanian communities.
The Alliance for  Albanians  and  BESA  challenged  the  dominant  position  of  DUI.
Media  coverage  of  smaller communities and their participation in the elections, including rallies and statements by parties, was limited.
Reporting  on  political  activities  by  smaller  communities,  particularly  Roma,  often  used negative stereotypes.
While electoral materials were provided in national minority languages, there was no specific voter education campaign to reach out to smaller communities or in their languages.
Complaints and Appeals
The SEC dealt with most administrative disputes related to elections, and the SAO and SCPC handled complaints  related  to  campaign  finance  and  misuse  of  administrative  resources  respectively.
Amendments  to  the  Electoral  Code  in  2015  strengthened  legal  guarantees  for  electoral  dispute resolution.
In  line  with  previous  OSCE/ODIHR  and  Venice  Commission  recommendations,  this included shorter deadlines, publication of administrative decisions within 24 hours, and guaranteeing the right to appeal all administrative decisions to the Administrative Court.
In addition, following previous recommendations, the SEC adopted a rulebook on procedures for dealing with complaints.
The SEC received 11 complaints prior to election day, the majority of which were dismissed due to a lack of jurisdiction or evidence.
Despite the legal obligation, the SEC did not implement an electronic system for case and complaint management.
Two decisions regarding the rejection of the SDPM and NDM lists were appealed to the Administrative Court and both were rejected, in closed session, as ungrounded.
Although both decisions were published on its website, the lack of public hearings is  contrary  to  OSCE  commitments  and  other  international  obligations.
In  addition,  a  number  of interlocutors raised concerns with judicial independence.
Overall, despite improvements in the law, the implementation of electoral dispute resolution procedures did not fully provide for an effective system of redress, at odds with OSCE commitments and Council of Europe standards.
The SCPC received some 1,000 requests for clarifications on issues related to misuse of administrative resources, many of which were anonymous or submitted with little evidence.
On 1 December, the SCPC requested the Basic Public Prosecution to initiate an investigation in two.
In addition, the Ombudsman initiated 10 investigations related to allegations of pressure on public employees and corrections in voter lists, which are ongoing.
Two other initiatives were submitted to the Constitutional Court challenging the constitutionality of election-related provisions.
On 9 November, the Constitutional Court rejected both: one from BESA, challenging the provision which required voters with “questionable” voter registration data to re-register  (no  jurisdiction)  and  one  from  NDM,  challenging  the  composition  of  the  Temporary Commission (ungrounded).
Election Observation
The Electoral Code allows for citizen, party and international observation.
Two citizen observer groups observed the elections: MOST deployed 80 LTOs and some 3,300 STOs, and CIVIL deployed 35 LTOs and some 300 STOs.
MOST also conducted parallel vote tabulation.
The participation of citizen observers at all stages of the electoral process contributed to the transparency of the elections.
Ten civil society organizations, working on voter awareness campaign, were notified of forthcoming financial audits before and soon after election day.
These organizations questioned the timing of such inquiry.
Early Voting and Election Day
Early voting and election day generally proceeded in an orderly manner and without major incidents or tension.
Transparency benefited from the presence of numerous citizen and party observers throughout the day (76 and 97 per cent, respectively) in the polling stations observed.
Early voting took place on 7 December for members of out-of-country EBs and on 10 December for homebound voters, internally displaced persons, detainees and prisoners.
Early voting was assessed positively in all but 3 observations.
Procedural problems observed related to ballot boxes not being properly sealed in 7 cases, and the secrecy of the vote not always ensured in 8 cases.
During voting at the country’s largest prison, Idrizovo, the observers noted several prisoners with valid ID being unable to vote because they were not on the voter list.
Over 500 prisoners were not included in the list due to expired IDs.
There is no procedure to renew the expired ID of prisoners.
On election day, almost all of the observed polling stations opened on time.
The opening process was assessed positively in most areas, however, observers noted procedural problems: in 20 cases the  required protocol was not filled in prior to voting, in 21 cases the ballot boxes were not shown to be empty, and in 10 cases the numbers of ballot box security seals were not recorded.
The voting process was assessed positively in 97 per cent of observations.
Procedures were generally followed, including those to safeguard against multiple voting such as inking of voters’ fingers and checking the photos on the voter list.
The layout of 4 per cent of polling stations observed was assessed as inadequate.
In half of these cases, this impacted on the secrecy of the vote.
Overcrowding was noted in 5 per cent of the polling stations visited.
More than half of the polling stations observed did not allow for independent access for voters with disabilities.
Significantly, in 16 per cent of the observed polling stations, persons were not allowed to vote as they were not on the voter lists.
While some of these citizens were redirected to other polling stations, others stated that they were part of the 28,341 records deleted in July 2016.
A total of 335 of the affected persons  submitted  complaints  to  the  SEC  on  this  matter.
This  highlights  the  continued  need  to sustainably address the structural flaws in the voter register.
Some serious irregularities were observed during voting, such as group voting (4 per cent), proxy voting (2 per cent), ballot boxes not sealed properly (2 per cent).
Incidents of voters being pressured and unauthorized persons directing the work of EBs were also observed.
During the day, a number of police and media reports informed of irregularities related to vote buying and photographing of ballots.
At least six people were arrested.
The counting process was assessed as efficient and transparent by the IEOM observers.
However, significant procedural omissions were observed in a number of polling stations and the counting was assessed negatively in 10 EBs observed.
This primarily related to steps taken prior to opening the ballot boxes, including counting the number of signatures and unused ballots (28 and 25 cases, respectively), and verifying the numbers of the ballot box security seals (14 cases).
Following the count, 16 EBs observed had difficulties filling in the results protocols, and 14 EBs did not follow the procedures for packing sensitive election materials and ballots.
Copies of the protocol were given to those who requested them; however, 33 EBs observed did not post the protocols, as required by law.
The counting finished by the midnight deadline in all polling stations observed.
Tabulation proceeded in a timely manner but was assessed negatively in 8 observations.
The main problems noted related to the conditions at MECs: insufficient space (24 MECs), overcrowding (22 MECs),  and  poor  organization  (9  MECs).
During  the  observation,  336  counting  protocols  had discrepancies and the ballots from 40 polling stations were recounted.
While not required by law, preliminary results by polling station and district were published online by the  SEC  throughout  the  night,  which  contributed  to  the  transparency  of  the  process.
The  SEC announced preliminary voter turnout at 67 per cent.
MISSION INFORMATION & ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Skopje, 12 December 2016 – This Statement of Preliminary Findings and Conclusions is the result of a common endeavor involving the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Right (OSCE/ODIHR), the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly (OSCE PA), the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) and the European Parliament (EP).
The assessment was made to determine whether the elections complied with OSCE commitments and other international obligations and standards for democratic elections and with national legislation.
Roberto Battelli was appointed by the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office as Special Co-ordinator and Leader of the OSCE short-term observer mission.
Azay Guliyev headed the OSCE PA delegation.
Stefan Schennach headed the PACE delegation.
Igor Šoltes headed the EP delegation.
Tana de Zulueta is the Head of the OSCE/ODIHR EOM, deployed from 3 November.
Each of the institutions involved in this International Election Observation Mission (IEOM) has endorsed the 2005 Declaration of Principles for International Election Observation.
This Statement of Preliminary Findings and Conclusions is delivered prior to the completion of the electoral process.
The final assessment of the elections will depend, in part, on the conduct of the remaining stages of the electoral process, including the count, tabulation and announcement of results, and the handling of possible post-election day complaints or appeals.
The OSCE/ODIHR will issue a comprehensive final report, including recommendations for potential improvements, some eight weeks after the completion of the electoral process.
The OSCE PA will present its report at its 2017 Winter Meeting.
The PACE will present its report in January at the first 2017 part-session in Strasbourg.
The EP will present its report at a forthcoming meeting of the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM includes 16 experts in the capital and 20 long-term observers deployed throughout the country.
On election day, 335 observers from 42 countries were deployed, including 277 long-term and short-term observers deployed by the OSCE/ODIHR, as well as a 24-member delegation from the OSCE PA, a 19-member delegation from the PACE, and a 15-member delegation from the EP.
Opening was observed in 92 polling stations and voting was observed in 1,337 polling stations across the country.
Counting was observed in 131 polling stations, and tabulation in all 80 MECs.
The observers wish to thank the authorities for their invitation to observe the elections, and the SEC and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for the assistance.
They also express their appreciation to other state institutions, political parties and civil society organizations and the international community representatives for their co-operation.
The English version of this report is the only official document.
Unofficial translations are available in the Macedonian and Albanian languages.
OSCE SOUTH EAST EUROPE MEDIA CONFERENCE CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The OSCE South East Europe Media Conference, held on 10-11 May 2018, gathered over 150 participants in Struga on the shores of Lake Ohrid representing government, civil society, press and media associations, journalist unions, public service media and media professionals to discuss media freedom issues in the region.
The fifth conference followed the Austrian OSCE Chairmanship’s “Media Freedom in the Western Balkans” Conference in February 2017, highlighted participants’ numerous personal and professional experiences with attacks on the safety of journalists, in particular female journalists, and the often precarious working conditions media workers in the region face.
In addition, the conference also delved into issues ranging from Public Service Media, with participants calling for their strengthened independence and financial sustainability, to best practices in the area of media self-regulation, new economic opportunities and challenges, the impact of digitalization on media freedom, and finally the phenomena of “fake news”, propaganda and disinformation.
On the first day of the Conference, participants adopted a declaration condemning the violence against Olivera Lakić, an investigative journalist with the Vijesti newspaper in Montenegro, who was shot the evening of 8 May 2018.
The Declaration sent a strong message of support and solidarity to her, the employees of Vijesti and all journalists and media workers who face threats, attacks and intimidation in the region.
Safety of journalists is still one of the biggest challenges in the region, and many crimes against journalists and media outlets go unpunished.
In the Declaration, participants called for an independent, effective and speedy investigation and for the perpetrators of the attack, including its masterminds, to be brought to justice.
It further emphasized that any attack on a journalist not only violates the rights of the journalist involved, but also undermines the public’s “right to know”, the rule of law and democracy itself.
Following the six sessions on the topics outlined above, the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media presents the following non-exhaustive findings, conclusions and recommendations from the two-day Conference.
These recommendations have been drafted to apply to multiple stakeholders in the media community and more broadly, including regional policy makers and authorities at every level, academics, media outlets, civil society, the international community working in the region, intermediaries and regulators, journalists’ unions and associations and journalists, themselves.
Participants in the session shared their personal and professional experiences of threats, intimidation, violent attacks, and smear campaigns—both online and offline—that they have faced in their line of work.
Participants also discussed the specific risks faced by female journalists, including intimidation, harassment and threats, given that they encounter the “double burden” of being targeted for both their gender and their profession.
One of the biggest challenges mentioned was a lack of recourse for bringing perpetrators of crimes against journalists to justice, either due to a lack of inadequate legal follow-through or inaction by law enforcement agencies and widespread impunity for such crimes.
The need for adequate legal frameworks to protect journalists’ safety was highlighted, as well as the importance of legal remedies in the event of a crime, and the obligation on the part of authorities to ensure accountability and fight impunity.
In certain parts of the region, though adequate legislation exists, implementation and enforcement are lacking and need to be strengthened.
Condemn publically and unequivocally and in solidarity with victims, all attacks, intimidation and violence against journalists and media workers, which include, but are not limited to: smear campaigns, surveillance, intimidation, forced closure of offices, online harassment, killings, torture, physical violence.
Engage with all relevant stakeholders—namely national authorities, the legislative, executive and judiciary branches of government, local and regional civil society, journalist associations and media outlets—to support investigations and efforts to bring perpetrators to justice, and continue to raise awareness about the threat to democracy posed by attacks against journalists, and the importance of protecting journalists’ safety and security.
Recognize the nexus between media freedom, justice and the rule of law in order to reflect on the specific needs of the media community in relevant legislation, prosecutorial activities and protective mechanisms, including police protection when necessary; this also requires adequate human and financial resources for investigative and prosecutorial processes, and political will.
Continue to call for and enforce swift investigations into attacks against journalists by law enforcement agencies, taking such threats seriously whether they occur on or offline, and provide adequate tools to victims of threats, harassment, violence or intimidation.
this will also require training for and co-operation between police and prosecutors.
Encourage education in newsrooms and in the media sector to train media professionals on self-protection against harassment, intimidation and attacks, including specific digital security training and resources following a threat or attack.
Speak with one voice and foster solidarity at the local, national and regional levels to condemn attacks, i.e. in co-operation with the international community, national authorities, politicians, journalist associations and relevant advocacy groups.
Recognize the double burden faced by female journalists and develop a gender mainstreamed strategy to better ensure their safety online and off.
While participants recognized that authorities have passed legislation in some areas in order to improve the working conditions of journalists and media workers, the media industry continues to face considerable challenges.
Precarious working conditions related to social security, wages and contracts that perpetuate job insecurity prevail.
Paired with political interference and/or business interests, working conditions for journalists and media workers are often at unacceptably low levels.
Due to the precarious working conditions and the economic challenges media outlets face, editorial independence might be undermined by financial and/or political pressure.
Raise awareness of the precarious working conditions for media workers, as manifested by low wages, irregular working hours, lack of health insurance, social security, and other employment benefits.
Awareness should be raised with the clear objective of improving working conditions in order to ensure the ability of journalists and media workers to report independently of political and economic pressure, and without the risk of self-censorship.
Empower, encourage and reform trade unions specifically for media professions and journalists to reinforce collective bargaining, both for fixed-term staff and freelancers working online and off, while fostering a sense of solidarity among those in the profession to increase social and working rights, such as social security, unemployment benefits, and health insurance.
Trade unions need to be recognized as legitimate representatives of journalists.
In the absence of labour unions, liaise with relevant state authorities such as labour inspectorates, to ensure that national social standards (work contracts, working hours, social security payments) are respected, and national minimum standards enforced.
Explore possibilities for collective contracts in the profession as a safety net and assurance of the continued professional security needed for ethical journalism, as in other professions.
Develop and enforce policies and legislation that safeguard media pluralism, maintaining competition without undue business or political interference that might put additional pressure on the editorial line of media and journalists.
Ensure transparency in funding and financial independence of media as key elements to ensure their freedom from outside interference, in particular when funding comes from public bodies.
Authorities should not try to influence the media market through hidden subsidies.
This session focused on the role of the public service media (PSM) and legal frameworks that govern their organizational set-up and programmes.
Participants discussed the role of governing and programmatic councils and their organization.
In particular, best practices that should govern their editorial guidelines, strategic direction and mandate, as well as society’s needs (linguistic, cultural, political) were discussed.
Because content produced by the PSM is primarily in the interest of society and should thus remain in the public domain, reflecting the cultural, ethnic, social, linguistic, religious composition of society and maintaining the interest of the public at all times was identified as important for maintaining credibility and fulfilling the core PSM mandate.
Participants also discussed the need to foster more investigative reporting within the PSM focused on issues affecting society, maintaining professional standards and editorial independence.
Ensure that staffing, including for Programming and Governing Councils, is based on professional merits, not party loyalty, to maintain independence from the political sphere while keeping in mind the public mandate.
Develop individual models for PSM financing according to local realities, given that no single model in the regional context is transposable to the other, and in order to ensure their financial sustainability, contributing to their political independence.
Take into account the cultural, ethnic, social, linguistic, religious composition of society to ensure that the PSM reflect all views represented in society in line with its public interest mandate.
Encourage investigative pieces and journalism also in PSM in line with best practices of the sector.
Foster innovation in the PSM to engage audiences, offering content online and offline that is adapted to society’s needs, including through means of programming and diffusion of information online (including through new technologies such as apps, online content, social media) as well as broadening possible revenue streams.
Representatives from the region, in particular journalists’ associations and interest groups, put forward best practices regarding self-regulation, and professional standards in the media landscape.
The panel concluded that ethical standards adopted on a voluntary basis among associations of journalists or within specific media outlets help media workers produce impartial and objective reporting.
In the region, it is difficult for Press Councils and selfregulatory mechanisms to achieve financial independence and sustainability without donations or public funding, given that media outlets themselves struggle for revenue and are not able to contribute to such Councils.
The panel concluded, however, that proper financial and human resources are needed to maintain editorial independence and journalistic credibility.
Raise awareness on self-regulatory mechanisms as a valuable tool in the region for establishing professional and ethical standards in a diverse media landscape, on a voluntary basis.
Efforts should be made for their consistent implementation.
Support the drafting of self-regulatory codes in a spirit of inclusiveness, transparency and in the interest of the general public, in line with international standards and best practices.
The sustainability of Press Councils should be a priority for the media community given their essential role in facilitating media self-regulation.
Promote training, education, and awareness-raising within the profession to further foster professional standards and independent reporting.
Co-operate with independent investigation mechanisms and self-initiative mechanisms such as Ombudspersons, Press Councils, Independent Commissions, to address issues pertaining ethical and professional journalism.
Digital literacy strategies are important to ensure that journalists and media actors as well as the public are able to effectively engage in media self-regulation.
The focus of this panel was to discuss the impact of digitalization on the media and freedom of expression, and in particular whether it advanced the “democratization” of the media landscape by providing citizens with outlets to express themselves online and journalists with a platform to disseminate their reporting more widely.
Panellists concluded that digitalization also comes with risks, given that media users are now exposed to more information and disinformation.
Digitalization has radically changed print media, even eradicating it in some places.
The session also touched upon the responsibility of news portals which diffuse reports widely, to consider their direct impact on the spread of quality news.
Safeguard, protect and respect basic human rights and rights related to freedom of expression and access to information online just as they are offline.
Focus on quality of news over quantity and speedy delivery in the era of “democratization” of the media through technology.
Given that fact-checking should be the basis of all journalism, continue to strengthen the credibility of media through fact-checking, in particular in the online sphere.
No single model for expanding the revenue base in the digital age has affirmed itself. Media should therefore explore and experiment with different financing models.
Develop training and promote education in the area of digital literacy, as well as awareness-raising on the cost of producing quality journalism.
While the term “fake news” is used frequently, the panel aimed to define, in more concrete terms, what falls under the term and how disinformation seemingly has been more widespread than in the past.
Participants concluded that, while the phenomenon has always existed, it has nevertheless been exacerbated by the use of the Internet, making it easier to spread unverified information and unprofessional reporting.
“Fake news” is not only political, strategically constructed information with a goal to undermine reliable spread of credible information in the public sphere, but also oftentimes driven by business interests.
States should not adopt legal bans on “fake news”, false news or other similar terms that are counterproductive and prone to abuse.
Existing laws, including on civil defamation laws, should provide adequate legal remedies for the dissemination of false information which harm reputation.
Politicians should not make or encourage statements which they know to be false or which demonstrates a reckless disregard for verifiable information.
Politicians should not use the term “fake news” to attack media outlets or journalists, as this undermines trust in media and journalism.
Authorities and other stakeholders should strive to create a free, independent and diverse communication environment in a media-literate society as the best method for countering the spread of false information.
Internet intermediaries must have clear policies for restricting or deleting content which should meet, at a minimum, due process guarantees, and international standards on freedom of expression.
ELECTION OBSERVATION MISSION
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Municipal Elections, Second Round, 29 October 2017
STATEMENT OF PRELIMINARY FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
PRELIMINARY CONCLUSIONS
The 29 October second round mayoral elections were competitive and the respect for fundamental freedoms contributed towards the conduct of democratic elections.
The campaign was short and subdued, with parties vying for support from beyond their traditional base though occasionally using aggressive rhetoric.
Isolated cases of misuse of administrative resources and vote-buying were reported.
Media continued providing balanced coverage of contestants, but this was overshadowed by negative campaigning spots.
Election day was overall professionally managed, although the performance of polling staff during counting could have been enhanced.
The legal framework provides for fundamental rights and freedoms and generally forms a sound basis for the conduct of democratic elections.
Most provisions of the Electoral Code (EC) are applicable for the second round.
However, the EC does not clearly regulate certain aspects, reducing coherence of the electoral legal framework.
The State Election Commission (SEC) improved the transparency of its work between rounds.
It did not, however, adequately plan for additional trainings, voter education and financial support for 10 municipalities with blocked accounts.
The work of the Municipal Election Commissions was largely assessed positively.
However, at least one case of perceived political bias were noted.
The system for election day-related complaints is centralized.
The SEC reviewed and rejected all 46 post first-round complaints.
While not meeting the 48-hour legal deadline, all cases were decided in open sessions and decisions published online, contributing to transparency.
However, the manner in which many complaints were handled challenged the rule of law and due process, contrary to OSCE commitments.
The Administrative Court upheld all SEC decisions that were appealed.
Updating voter lists between rounds is not provided for in the law, effectively disenfranchising voters who turned 18 years old in this period.
More than 900 voters in penal institutions were unable to exercise their suffrage rights in both rounds, as they lacked valid identification documents.
The SEC  adopted  a  decision,  by  which  voters  who  were  on  voter  lists,  but  whose  identification documents expired, were not allowed to vote.
In total, 68 candidates from 8 parties, as well as 2 independents contested the second round; six candidates were women.
The campaign became dynamic only a few days before the second round.
Campaign strategies were re-designed, and methods modified to target undecided voters.
Some parties expressed concerns on the Prime Minister pledging government support for municipalities with mayors from the governing coalition.
This action undermined the separation of the state and party, contrary to OSCE commitments.
In the run-up to the second round, news coverage of the campaign was limited, but increased in the final week.
On private media, paid advertising was dominated by the two larger parties, mostly negative in tone.
The effectiveness of adjudicating media-related complaints ahead of the second round was undermined by the courts missing legal deadlines.
Election day was overall well managed.
However, procedural irregularities observed during the counting process detracted from the positive assessment, and in more than half of polling stations observed, results protocols were not displayed.
Tabulation was assessed as efficient and transparent.
Tensions outside of some polling stations due to the presence of party activists were observed in two municipalities; some cases of pressure on voters, as well as several cases of vote-buying, were referred  to  the  authorities.
Following  the  end  of  voting,  the  governing  coalition  endorsed  the electoral process, while the main opposition party declared that it would not recognize the election results due to alleged widespread violations before and on election day.
PRELIMINARY FINDINGS Background and Post-First Round Developments  The  first  round  of  elections  took  place  on  15  October.
Mayors  were  elected  in  two-round majoritarian contests, and councillors were elected under a single-round proportional system.
Final first round results were announced by the State Election Commission (SEC) on 24 October, and showed close races in a number of mayoral contests.
Forty-six mayors were elected in the first round.
Of these, 38 are from the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM), 3 from the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization – Democratic Party for Macedonia National Unity (VMRO-DPMNE), 2 from the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI), 1 from the Democratic Party of Turks in Macedonia (DPTM) and 2 independents; among the elected, three were women.
Following the first round, in municipalities where the elections were declared final, a peaceful transition of power occurred.
Mayoral runoffs were called for 29 October in 35 municipalities, which included 70 candidates, including two independents.
Of these, six were women.
Ahead of the runoff, the Alliance for Albanians (AA) announced a new coalition with the Movement BESA (BESA), while the SDSM recommitted to support the DUI.
Post-First Round Complaints and Appeals  The legal framework establishes a centralized process for election day-related complaints, with the SEC adjudicating cases submitted only by electoral contestants concerning irregularities in voting, counting and tabulation processes.
These SEC decisions could be appealed to the Administrative Court.
Contestants have the right to submit complaints within 48 hours from the publication of preliminary results.
However, the SEC announced a unified deadline, not considering the actual time when  each  Municipal  Election  Commission  (MEC)  published  its  results.
This  significantly shortened the timeframe for some complaints and undermined the right to seek an effective legal redress.
In addition, unduly strict provisions require the SEC to annul polling station results in case of procedural irregularities, including minor ones.
The SEC received 46 post first-round election day complaints, the vast majority lodged by the largest opposition coalition.
Most concerned minor irregularities, while all requested the annulment of polling stations results.
The SEC rejected all complaints, with members deciding along political lines, in contravention of a requirement of impartiality.
While many cases were substantively examined, thoroughness varied.
In some cases, the grounds of rejection were unreasonable, and some lacked a clear and sound legal basis.
Several cases were denied consideration on technical grounds, contrary to international good practice.
The manner in which many complaints were handled challenged the rule of law and due process, contrary to OSCE commitments.
While not meeting the 48-hour deadline, the SEC decided all cases in open sessions and complaints and decisions were promptly uploaded to the SEC website, contributing to transparency.
Twenty-eight SEC decisions were appealed to the Administrative Court, almost all within the 24-hour deadline.
As a general rule, public hearings are not held in the Administrative Court, limiting transparency  in  election  dispute  resolution.
However,  the  court  held  open  sessions  to  provide information  about  the  cases,  as  required  by  the  EC;  decisions  were  made  within  the  48-hour deadline and promptly published.
All appeals were rejected, leaving substantiated cases without an effective remedy.
Overall, the deadlines for the submission and handling of post-election complaints and appeals are unreasonably short, contrary to international good practice.
Legal Framework The legal framework provides for fundamental rights and freedoms, including the protection of minority rights, and generally forms a sound basis for the conduct of democratic elections.
Most EC provisions are applicable for the second round; however, the EC does not clearly regulate certain aspects of the process,  reducing coherence of  the electoral legal framework.
This includes an absence of provisions on the possibility to update voter lists, applications for homebound voting, the allocation of billboard and poster space and the accreditation of observers.
Election Administration Second round contests were administered by the SEC, 35 MECs located in the municipalities where runoffs occurred, and 1,517 Election Boards (EBs).
The SEC’s secretariat identified EBs and MECs that needed additional training on how to fill in results protocols.
However, the trainings provided by the SEC were not implemented nationwide and those observed by the OSCE/ODIHR EOM were assessed as insufficient.
In addition, as in the first round, the SEC did not detail procedures for MECs in correcting mistakes in the protocols and its instructions for lower-level commissions lacked clarity.
Positively, six MECs organised trainings for EB staff on their own initiative.
During  counting  for  both  rounds,  the  validity  of  ballots  was  determined  according  to  a  SEC decision.
In contradiction with the EC, it required EBs to invalidate certain ballots on which the intent of the voter was clear.
This, in addition to a lack of provisions for spoiled and blank ballots, contributed to a significant number of invalid ballots.
The costs of administering the elections are borne by municipal governments, except when the municipality’s account is blocked by a court decision.
In such cases, funding is supplied by the state budget, based on costs of previous elections.
However, the SEC did not transfer funds in a timely manner, leaving 10 MECs in financial difficulties.
Seven MECs informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that they financed the elections from their members’ personal funds.
The SEC improved its transparency between rounds by announcing sessions and their agendas in advance and posting some decisions of recent sessions online.
However, the SEC continued to make some decision in closed meetings.
The work of MECs was largely assessed positively by the OSCE/ODIHR EOM.
However, at least one case of perceived political bias was noted in the run up to the second round.
Voter education spots increased in the last week ahead of the elections; however, the SEC’s overall outreach efforts were minimal.
Voter Registration There are no legal provisions for updating voter lists between rounds, effectively disenfranchising voters who were excluded from voter lists for having expired identification documents (ID) and who turned 18 years old in that period, at odds with OSCE commitments.
The SEC informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that more than 900 voters in penitentiary institutions were not included on lists as they did not have valid ID and were not able to vote in either round.
In addition, as there are no provisions to accommodate voters in hospitals, long-term care facilities and retirement homes, those voters were also disenfranchised.
On 25 October, the SEC adopted a decision by which voters who were on voter lists but whose IDs had expired between rounds were unable to vote.
The SEC urged these voters to renew their documents before the second round.
Campaign Environment and Campaign Finance The official campaign period for the second round started on 16 October and ended on 27 October at midnight.
The generally peaceful atmosphere exhibited during the first round continued for the second round.
Electoral contestants campaigned freely and without restrictions.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM noted many allegations of voter pressure, intimidation and vote-buying by different parties; a few were credible.
Some criminal complaints were filed with the Public Prosecutor’s Office.
The campaign became dynamic only a few days prior to the runoffs.
Campaign strategies were redesigned centrally, but unlike before, candidates were given more autonomy locally.
Overall, campaigns focused on direct communication and face to face interaction with voters.
Candidates continued  using  official  Facebook  pages  for  campaigning;  however  it  was  to  a  lesser  extent compared  to  the  first  round.
Some  candidates  focused  on  communities  where  turnout  was particularly  low  during  the  first  round.
Campaign  rhetoric  was  more  intense  and  occasionally aggressive in ethnic Albanian areas, as compared to the municipalities with SDSM and VMRO-DPMNE candidates.
OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors noted that the second round was more competitive, with parties vying for support from outside their traditional base.
Women candidates who met with the OSCE/ODIHR EOM did not express concern on the lack of equal opportunity to campaign.
During the second round campaign, there were only a few large-scale rallies with parties’ national leadership  often  present.
The  Prime  Minister,  at  times  in  his  official  capacity,  addressed  the electorate at SDSM rallies, and used Twitter to send campaign messages.
He promoted inclusivity, local development and European Union and NATO integration.
Some parties expressed concerns on the Prime Minister pledging government support for municipalities with an SDSM or DUI mayor.
These actions undermined the separation of the state and party, contrary to OSCE commitments.
The ceiling for campaign expenditures was the same as for the first round.
Two interim reports were required by contestants before the first round although there were no sanctions against those who failed to submit them on time.
A third interim campaign finance report was due on 28 October, and only five contestants complied with this requirement, reducing transparency of the process.
Most submitted reports were published on the SEC website upon receipt.
Media  In the run-up to the second round, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM monitored media mainly focused on the outcomes of the first round with limited reporting on second round campaigning.
News coverage devoted to the contestants increased only in the final week of the campaign.
As required by the EC, the public broadcaster provided contestants with free-of-charge air time during prime time; five candidates used this opportunity.
As in the first round, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM media monitoring indicated that the public broadcaster covered all contestants in a balanced way and neutral in tone.
It devoted, among others, 25 per cent of news coverage to the SDSM, 24 per cent to VMRO-DPMNE, 20 per cent to DUI, 15 per cent to BESA and 9 per cent to AA.
Private channels devoted 40 per cent of news coverage to the SDSM, 35 per cent to VMRO-DPMNE, 9 per cent to DUI, 9 per cent to AA, 4 per cent to BESA and 2 per cent to DPA.
A high number of paid advertising spots, negative in tone, were largely used by the VMRO-DPMNE, and at times by the SDSM.
Debates were organized by various broadcast media among mayoral candidates in their respective municipalities.
In total, eight debates were hosted by the public channel, MTV1, and the private channel, Kanal 5, between SDSM and VMRO-DPMNE candidates; no debates took place featuring ethnic Albanian and independent candidates.
The Agency for Audio and Audio-visual Media Services (AVMS) initiated two misdemeanour proceedings against some broadcasters during the second round.
The cases concerned violations of the EC provisions on paid political advertising limits and unbalanced reporting.
The Basic Court issued decisions in two cases from the first round, imposing fines lower than prescribed by the EC.
Both were appealed by the AVMS on grounds that the fines were insufficient.
The court still has to decide on this appeal.
The effectiveness of adjudicating media-related complaints ahead of second round was undermined by courts missing legal deadlines.
Citizen and International Observers  All accredited citizen observer groups continued their observation activities, including deploying observers for the runoffs.
Despite the absence of legal provisions for the second round, the SEC allowed the submission of new lists of observers for already accredited organizations.
Election Day Early  voting  and  election  day  were  overall  well  managed.
However,  procedural  irregularities observed during the counting process detracted from the positive assessment.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM is aware of five cases initiated by the police on voters taking photos of their ballots; two cases on vote-buying were referred to the authorities.
A robust police presence around polling locations in some municipalities was noted.
Partisan and citizen observers were present in 92 and 54 per cent, respectively, of polling stations observed.
In 53 per cent of observations, EBs were chaired by women, and the majority of EB members were female.
Early voting on 28 October was positively assessed in all 9 prisons and in 40 of 44 observations of homebound voting.
Observers’ negative assessments were attributed to compromised vote secrecy and the absence of the ballot box.
On election day, opening was positively assessed in 44 of 45 polling stations observed.
The integrity of the process was not affected by a number of observed minor procedural irregularities.
In five cases, protocols were not filled in, and in one municipality, the number of registered voters printed on protocols was incorrect; the SEC was required to correct the error.
Voting was positively assessed in 97 per cent of polling stations observed.
However, tensions outside  some  polling  stations  due  to  the  presence  of  party  activists  were  observed  in  two municipalities.
35 Observed  procedural  irregularities  included  family  voting  (6  per  cent), compromised vote secrecy (2 per cent), and partisan observers overstepping their mandate (2 per cent).
The SEC advised three MECs on how to address various irregularities.
Polling stations closed on time and most EBs followed closing procedures.
However, counting was negatively assessed in 8 of 44 observations.
In 14 cases, EBs did not properly determine the number of voters who voted, and in 9 cases, they did not count unused ballots.
More than half of EBs observed did not display result protocols, undermining transparency.
The tabulation of results was efficient and transparent in all 35 MECs observed.
The centralized result management system operated properly in all but one MEC.
In 16 MECs, a number of EB results protocols with numerical errors were corrected, indicating insufficient training on how to complete them.
In six MECs, official complaints were filed.
The SEC started publishing preliminary results by polling station online shortly after the closing of the polls.
Voter turnout was announced at 51.92 per cent.
While the SDSM and DUI endorsed the electoral process, the VMRO-DPMNE declared that it would not recognize the election results due to alleged widespread violations before and on election day.
MISSION INFORMATION AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Skopje, 30 October 2017 – This Statement of Preliminary Findings and Conclusions is the result of the observation by the Election Observation Mission (EOM) deployed by the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR).
The assessment was made to determine whether  the  elections  complied  with  OSCE  commitments,  other  international  obligations  and standards for democratic elections, and with national legislation.
Ambassador Audrey Glover is the Head of the OSCE/ODIHR EOM, deployed from 13 September.
The OSCE/ODIHR has endorsed  the 2005 Declaration of Principles  for  International Election Observation.
This Statement of Preliminary Findings and Conclusions is delivered prior to the completion of the electoral process.
The final assessment of the elections will depend, in part, on the conduct of the remaining stages of the electoral process, including the handling of possible post-election day complaints and appeals.
The OSCE/ODIHR will issue a comprehensive final report, including recommendations for potential improvements, some eight weeks after the completion of the electoral process.
For the second round, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM included 17 experts in the capital and 17 long-term observers and 88 short-term observers deployed throughout the country.
On election day, 126 observers were deployed, drawn from 25 OSCE participating States.
The observers wish to thank the authorities of the host country for the invitation to observe the elections, and the State Election Commission for its assistance.
They also wish to express their appreciation to other state institutions, political parties and  civil society  organizations and the international community representatives for co-operation.
Monitoring and Good Governance Department
GRANT SCHEME FOR INTER MUNICIPAL COOPERATION 2009
GUIDELINES FOR APPLICANTS
OSCE Spillover Monitor Mission to Skopje- Good Governance Team
GRANT SCHEME FOR INTER MUNICIPAL COOPERATION 2009
Table of contents
1. Background
2. Objective of the OSCE IMC Programme
3. Rules for this call for proposal
3.1. Eligibility criteria
3.1.2. Eligibility of proposals
3.1.3. Eligibility of Costs
4. How to apply and procedures to follow
5. Evaluation and Selection of Applications
5.1 Criteria for evaluation
1. Background
Inter Municipal Cooperation – IMC in many countries is considered as an effective tool for delivery of services to citizens, particularly by financially weak municipalities.
Initiatives of partnerships between two or more units of local self government are already a practice in the country, and many administrations considers IMC a strategy for overcoming difficulties in managing all competences deriving from the 2002 Law on Local Self Government.
The concept of Inter-Municipal Cooperation (IMC) is aloud and regulated by the Law on Local Self-Government.
The Law only authorizes cooperation among municipalities, leaving the optional and voluntary nature of the instrument.
2. Objective of the OSCE grant scheme for IMC 2009
The principal objective of OSCE grant scheme for IMC 2009 is to foster the exercise of inter-municipal partnerships by provision of necessary financial start up.
The grant scheme shall be therefore conceived as contribution to realize initiatives of mutual benefit to all proposing partners and shall by no means be used to finance expenditures within the reach and under the competence of individual municipalities.
3. Rules of the OSCE grant scheme for IMC 2009
Subject to availability OSCE will provide three grants not exceeding Euro 20.000.
Total amount of this grant scheme is Euro 60.000.
These guidelines – which abide to the OSCE project implementation and procurement rules and regulations – stipulate the rules for submission, selection and implementation of the IMC proposals.
For the issues that are not regulated by these guidelines the OSCE rules and regulations will apply.
3.1. Eligibility criteria
There are three sets of eligibility criteria
- applicants which may request the grant
- proposals for which a grant may be awarded – eligible IMC arrangements
- types of costs that are eligible for the grant
3.1.1. Eligibility of applicants
These criteria have to met in cumulative terms
The grant scheme refers only to municipalities; applications shall come exclusively from consortium of two or more municipalities.
Therefore, applications received from public companies and NGOs will not be accepted.
However, activities could be outsourced to third parties only if the latter record the proposing municipalities as their only shareholders.
Third parties must have been registered at least 12 months before the date of publishing of the present guidelines.
- only one application per municipality is allowed
In case more than one application is submitted per municipality/ies, the municipality/ies will have to choose only one of the projects that will participate.
- applications must be for IMC between at least two municipalities
The application should involve at least two municipalities.
The application should state which municipality will be responsible for the management of the Programme.
Each project application must define one applicant as the overall lead partner who will sign – in the person of the Mayor – and submit the proposal on behalf of the other(s).
Applications shall include endorsement letters by all municipal councils involved, and a document signed and sealed by the relevant authorities of the municipalities stipulating that all the activities undertaken in relation to this project will be fully in compliance with the domestic laws.
The lead municipality will sign a contract with the OSCE.
-  proposals already funded are not to be admitted
The applicant shall not submit a proposal that is already being implemented with funds secured from another donor.
Funds under this grant may be used for complementary activities to projects financed by another donor only with an official consensus of the donor, to be attached to the application.
If the project proposal – entirely or partially – has already been submitted to other donors as part of the applicant’s fund-raising activities, a relevant note should be made.
3.1.2. Eligibility of proposals
IMC arrangements comprise a set of activities which should be clearly described in the Grant Application Form, including relevant documentation when required.
Projects demanding for infrastructural intervention will not be receivable under the hereby described grant scheme.
All activities comprised among competences listed under the 2002 Law on Local Self Government are eligible for proposals.
All selected projects will have to be converted into legal agreements between the OSCE and the proposing consortia; the agreements will contain the starting date of activities.
All activities and related costs must finish by 31st December 2009
Under no circumstances the following types of arrangements will be considered eligible:
Establishment of joint communal (public enterprise) and request for equity
Establishment of private companies
One-off conferences and/or workshops: conferences and or workshops can be financed only if they form part of the wider range of activities implemented throughout the duration of the Programme.
Publication of materials regarding workshops and conferences outside of the scope of the wider range of activities will not be accepted.
3.1.3 Eligibility of Costs
Only eligible costs will be considered for the grant.
The budget of the Application is a cost estimate and a ceiling for eligible costs.
During the process of evaluation of the proposal the Evaluation Committee reserves the right to ask for clarification and to request for modifications or reductions in order to comply with OSCE rules and procedures.
Human resources
Project management staff (if necessary to be outsourced) costs shall not exceed 20 % of the overall budget.
Civil servants (including municipal staff) cannot receive any fee related to project management tasks; however their support to the management of the project may be listed and considered as in kind contribution by the consortium of applicants.
Hiring of expertise related to the scope of the proposal is allowed.
Experts employed for the implementation of the project shall be selected by open competition.
The municipality acting as project leader is responsible for observing that the public administration officials, who can only be hired as experts/consultants, are delivering services outside their working hours, and if within, that they have approved annual leave or special leave without pay.
Goods and services
The purchase of goods and services whose total value equals or exceeds 500 euros shall be carried out through a quotation procedure in which at least three substantially responsive price quotations are obtained.
Proposals shall clearly indicate the final beneficiary of goods purchased with OSCE funds.
The costs for procurement of goods cannot be higher than the 50% of the budget of the project.
Contribution from municipalities
Proposals shall contain evidence of contributions by the applicants for an overall value of at least 20% of the proposed budget.
Details on the kind of contribution must be provided in accordance to the requirements outlined in the application form and will be subjected to the evaluation of the selection panel.
The in-kind contribution is the actual expenditure borne by the applicant(s) and should be listed in separate budget.
The in-kind contributions may be the salaries of the staff assigned for the project, renting of premises, usage of the equipment and similar.
Under no circumstances the following types of costs will be considered eligible:
- payment of debts
- budget items financed by other donor and/or municipal budget
- purchase of land, buildings
- equity for establishment of public enterprises and or for purchase of stocks
- credits to third parties
4. How to apply and procedures to follow
Interested municipalities must submit their proposals using the application form available at http://www.osce.org/tenders/38551.html
Applications must be submitted in Macedonian Language.
If so desired they may also be submitted additionally (next to the version in Macedonian) in any official language that is in official use in the Municipalities concerned.
A short summary of the proposal must be submitted in English using the pattern in Annexes.
Applications must be bound (no loose papers), hand-written applications will not be accepted.
All documents required by the present guidelines must be attached to the proposal.
Applications must be received in a sealed envelope by registered mail, courier or by hand-delivery (a signed and dated certificate of receipt will be given to the deliverer) at the address below:
Monitoring and Good Governance Department OSCE Spillover Monitor Mission to Skopje
QBE Makedonija Building (2nd floor) 11 Oktomvri Str, no.25, 1000 Skopje
Applications sent by any other means (e.g. by fax or by e-mail) or delivered to other addresses will be rejected.
Applications must be submitted in one original and four copies.
The deadline for the receipt of applications is 31 July 2009 at 17.30 hrs CET; any application received after the deadline will be automatically rejected even if the postmark indicates a date preceding the deadline or if the delay is due to the private courier service.
5. Evaluation and Selection of Applications (Selection panel + timing)
Applications matching all requirements outlined in the previous sections of these guidelines will be evaluated by a selection panel composed by:
3 representatives of the OSCE SMMS Monitoring and Good Governance Department
1 representative from the Ministry of Local Self Government
1 representative EU office in Skopje
Results of the selection will be published on the OSCE website 15 days after the deadline for submission of applications.
Applicants of the selected proposals will be informed by mail.
The process of selection and evaluation will be carried out in accordance with fixed criteria.
Applicants of the selected proposals will be contacted by OSCE SMMS Public Administration Reform Department representatives; the OSCE shall conclude an agreement with the first 3 selected consortia whose proposals, according to the panel’s decision will be selected to be implemented with the grants of this project.
The OSCE retains the right of modifying selected project proposals before entering into contractual agreements with the leading municipalities of the consortia.
5.1. Criteria for evaluation
The evaluation panel will revise all eligible proposals in accordance with the criteria outlined here below:
The evaluation of the Applications will be carried out in two stages, i.e. A) the administrative compliance and B) the technical compliance.
A) The administrative compliance:
The administrative compliance includes the following criteria:
1) A municipality has submitted only ONE proposal as Lead or as a Partner Municipality
2) The Application Form is sealed and stamped on each page by the Mayors of ALL participating municipalities
3) Verification that the Application Form is accompanied by an endorsement of ALL municipal councils regarding the IMC arrangement and a document signed and sealed by the relevant authorities of the municipalities stipulating that all the activities undertaken in relation to this project will be fully in compliance with the domestic laws.
4) Verification that all the sections of the Application Form have been completed
5) Verification that the requested amount of the grant does not exceed the budget ceiling of 20.000 Eur, excluding the in-kind contribution
IMPORTANT: An Application which does not fully comply with the criteria for administrative compliance will not be reviewed nor take in consideration.
B) The technical compliance:
The evaluation of the technical compliance will be carried out in accordance with the fixed criteria as outlined in the Evaluation Grid:
1) The Application contributes towards or creates system and/or conditions for joint service provision or system for joint administration or creation for partnership for planning and coordination of joint activities
2) The Application proposes a management structure for decision making for IMC composed of representatives from all participating municipalities.
3) The modality of implementation of the project (quality of proposed project management)
4) The Application clearly explains the impact of the proposed IMC on the improvement of performance of an administrative duty or service provision or performance of joint activity
5) The Application demonstrates sustainability of the IMC beyond the completion of the project
6) The proposed amount of the in-kind contribution (at least 20% of the total amount of the grant) and eventual cash contribution (min. 4%)
Evaluation grid
Criteria
Participating municipalities are of mixed ethnic composition
Existence of assessment for the need and benefits of joined administration or service provision
joint administration or service provision components present in the proposal
Cooperating municipalities should represent natural, geographical and territorial unit or connection
all municipalities applying are bordering
Gender and multi-ethnicity components are present in the proposal
cash contribution from applicants (at least 4% of the overall budget)
quality of the proposal:
1) feasibility of the proposed actions (timeliness and resources vs objectives)
2) Proposed joint management structure and mechanism of coordination among partners
3) sustainability beyond project closure
4) equitable distribution of benefits/outputs among applicants
5) Benefits to foster inter community relations and building trust and cohesion among communities
The criteria related to the quality of the proposal will receive a score from 1 to 10 in line with the following guidelines:
1 = extremely poor
2 = very poor
3 = poor
4 = insufficient
5 = meagre
6 = acceptable
7 = reasonable
8 = good
9 = very good
10 = excellent
While the legal framework did not cover all aspects sufficiently, the 30 September Referendum was administered impartially and fundamental freedoms were respected throughout the campaign.
The election administration was collegial and met deadlines, but was not always fully transparent in its work.
The absence of an active ‘Against’ or organized boycott campaign meant that the media struggled to provide balanced coverage but did convey extensive information and diverse views to voters.
Referendum day was generally calm and well-organized, and procedures were administered professionally and transparently.
On 30 July, the parliament called for a consultative referendum on approval of a bilateral agreement with Greece, which envisages constitutional amendments that would change the name of the country.
Implementation of the agreement is considered to be a precondition for EU and NATO integration.
The referendum asked voters to decide, “Are you in favour of EU and NATO integration by accepting the agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Greece?”.
The Constitutional Court received three applications challenging the parliament’s decision to hold the referendum and the formulation of the question, but these applications were rejected.
The legal framework for the referendum is neither comprehensive nor harmonized.
The Referendum Law sets out the basic rules for the referendum process, but lacks detail on certain substantive aspects.
Attempts by the State Election Commission (SEC) to fill these gaps and clarify other issues through regulations raised questions about their legal basis and the scope of the SEC’s regulatory authority.
Recent amendments to the Electoral Code introduced a temporary SEC for six months.
The SEC administered the referendum impartially and generally met legal deadlines.
The commission held regular public meetings that were conducted in an efficient and collegial manner, but lacked substantive debate on key issues.
The lower level commissions generally worked in a professional manner and enjoyed the confidence of local stakeholders.
The SEC conducted a voter information campaign which emphasized freedom of choice and participation rather than encouraging turnout.
While the authorities made some efforts to provide public information related to the agreement, the content of the agreement was insufficiently explained.
The broadcast media largely filled this gap by providing information programmes related to the agreement and referendum, which improved the ability of voters to make an informed choice.
Citizens at least 18 years of age have the right to vote, except for those declared legally incapacitated by a court decision.
The final voter list included 1,806,336 eligible voters.
Despite longstanding structural issues and the relevance of the turnout threshold for the referendum, the accuracy of the voter list was not cited as a major concern by IROM interlocutors.
The referendum campaign was peaceful and generally active across the country and the freedoms of assembly, association and expression were respected.
The parliament, primarily through the ruling SDSM and DUI parties, led the ‘For’ campaign, which was broadly supported by ethnic communities and also featured a high degree of engagement by foreign leaders and representatives of the EU, US and NATO.
Although there was no active ‘Against’ campaign, a coalition of civic associations and two smaller political parties advocated a boycott through rallies and on social media, often featuring inflammatory language.
The legal framework for financing the referendum campaign does not include spending limits and lacks clear requirements for disclosure, auditing procedures and sanctions.
The government allocated some EUR 1.3 million to the parliament to spend on media advertisements, which the opposition declined, thus only the ‘For’ portion of the public funds were spent.
There were no comprehensive requirements for campaign finance reporting, undermining transparency.
The media provided citizens with an extensive amount of information related to the referendum.
Campaign-related advertisements were aired regularly in private media.
Public media were not obliged to provide free airtime.
Given the lack of an active ‘Against’ campaign, combined with a ‘Boycott’ campaign conducted primarily on social media, the views expressed by the ‘For’ campaign clearly dominated across all broadcasters.
Most monitored television channels organised special programmes that provided diverse information about the broader context of the referendum.
The legal framework provides for observation of the referendum by international and citizen observers.
The “proposer” of the referendum, in this case the parliament, had the right to appoint representatives to observe in polling stations but declined to do so.
Political parties were otherwise not permitted to observe.
Early voting and referendum day proceeded in an orderly manner.
Procedures in polling stations were administered professionally and transparently, without major irregularities.
In many cases, accredited citizen observers were unable to identify themselves and appeared to be affiliated with political parties.
The country’s accession to the European Union (EU) and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has historically been impeded by a lack of consensus among member states of these organizations regarding the name of the country.
On 17 June 2018, following a year of negotiations under the auspices of the United Nations, the country signed a bilateral agreement with Greece.
The agreement envisages constitutional amendments that would include changing the constitutional name of the country to the “Republic of North Macedonia”.
Implementation of the agreement is considered to be a precondition for EU and NATO integration.
A decision to hold a consultative referendum on approval of the agreement passed parliament on 30 July, without reaching a consensus with the opposition on the consultative nature of the referendum and the formulation of the question to be decided.
Following the referendum, constitutional amendments would still require a two-thirds majority vote in parliament to be completed by the end of 2018.
Once the amendments are enacted, the agreement would then require adoption by the parliament of Greece.
The referendum is primarily regulated by the 1991 Constitution (last amended in 2011) and the 2005 Law on Referenda and Citizen Initiatives (Referendum Law).
The legal framework is neither comprehensive nor harmonized.
The Referendum Law sets out the basic rules for the referendum process, but it lacks detail on certain substantive aspects.
The Referendum Law stipulates that provisions of the 2006 Electoral Code apply if not otherwise specified.
The SEC issued regulations that applied the Electoral Code provisions on election administration and voter registration to the referendum, but not on campaign finance and campaigning.
The exemption of these areas from the legal framework led to some confusion among stakeholders with regard to applicable rules and detracted from legal certainty.
SEC attempts to fill these gaps and to clarify other issues through new regulations raised questions about their legal basis and the scope of the SEC’s regulatory authority.
The Referendum Law requires that the issue being decided be “precisely formulated and unambiguous, so that the citizen may answer ‘For’ or ‘Against’”.
The question on the ballot was, “Are you in favour of EU and NATO membership by accepting the agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Greece?” Some IROM interlocutors noted that the compound nature of the question, the lack of explicit reference to the change of the country’s constitutional name and other implicit constitutional amendments could mislead voters.
Other stakeholders argued that there was a direct relationship between the different parts of the question, as evidenced by the public statements of EU and NATO officials that the agreement is a precondition of integration.
In a public hearing on 19 September, the Constitutional Court debated weaknesses in the formulation of the question, but upheld the constitutionality of the process (see Complaints and Appeals).
The law requires a threshold of a majority of registered voters for a referendum to be considered adopted, but does not explicitly state if this applies to a consultative referendum.
Given the consultative nature, the government did not identify de facto criteria, such as a turnout threshold or proportion of ‘For’ votes, upon which it would or would not pursue the proposed constitutional amendments in parliament following the referendum.
However, the prime minister, foreign minister and the speaker of parliament each indicated that the amendments would be pursued regardless of the turnout, should a majority vote ‘For’.
The public, including those advocating a boycott, broadly connected the threshold to the success of the referendum.
Differing interpretations of the threshold created uncertainty as to the procedural consequences of the vote.
The referendum was administered by a three-level administration, comprising the State Election Commission (SEC), 80 Municipal Election Commissions (MECs) and the City of Skopje Election Commission, and 3,480 Election Boards (EBs).
An additional 33 EBs were established in Diplomatic–Consular Offices (DCOs) for out-of-country voting, and one additional EB in the SEC to administer the voting of EB members deployed to these DCOs.
Departing from good practice, the latest amendments to the Electoral Code from July 2018 introduced a temporary SEC with a mandate of six-months.
The seven members, three of whom are women, were nominated by parliamentary parties; four from the ruling coalition, including the vice president, and three from the opposition, including the president.
The Electoral Code foresees the appointment of a deputy secretary general; however, this position was not defined or filled.
MECs are composed of five members (and deputies) who serve a five-year term and are randomly selected from among public employees.
MECs oversaw the administration of the referendum in each municipality, appointed and trained EBs, and managed other technical preparations.
EBs comprise three members (and deputies) who are randomly selected from among public employees and were responsible for management of the polling stations and conducting voting and counting procedures.
For the referendum, EBs did not include two temporary members nominated by parties, as provided for in the Electoral Code for elections.
Despite some late changes in the composition of MECs and EBs, the requirement for balanced ethnic and gender representation in election commissions was broadly respected.
The SEC administered the referendum impartially and generally met legal deadlines.
The commission held regular public meetings that were conducted in an efficient and collegial manner.
However, public sessions lacked substantive debate, with decisions being adopted unanimously following prior working meetings that were not open to the public or observers.
While the SEC uploaded most of its decisions and key information on its website, not all decisions were published, at odds with the SEC’s internal rules of procedures.
In addition, all decisions on tendering procedures for selection of contractors were taken in closed meetings of the SEC procurement committee.
The lower level commissions generally worked in a professional manner and enjoyed the confidence of local stakeholders.
However, although sessions of most MECs were public, in a few cases they were not announced beforehand, making observation difficult.
A number of MECs informed the ODIHR ROM about overdue salary payments from 2016 and 2017, and many complained that the allocation of funds did not take into account the number of or distance between polling stations in each municipality.
The SEC conducted cascade trainings for lower level election commissions, utilizing presentations, manuals, and videos.
MEC trainings observed by the ODIHR ROM were well organized, interactive, and conducted in both the Macedonian and Albanian languages where required.
However, the SEC was late in delivering trainings for the MECs and decided to merge these with the training of trainers.
The trainings of EBs observed by the ODIHR ROM were less organized and of lower quality.
Training manuals were made available only for the training of EB members.
Positively, in line with a prior ODIHR recommendation, the SEC conducted a voter information campaign, including televised and online content, much of which targeted younger voters.
The material focused on referendum day procedures and how to locate polling stations, and emphasized freedom of choice and participation rather than encouraging turnout.
The authorities made some efforts to provide information related to the agreement.
However, the substance of the agreement and its potential impact were explained insufficiently or too late in the campaign.
The broadcast media largely filled this gap by providing information programmes related to the agreement and referendum, which improved the ability of voters to make an informed choice (see Media section).
Citizens at least 18 years of age have the right to vote, except for those declared legally incapacitated by a court decision.
Deprivation of the right to vote on the basis of mental or intellectual disability contravenes international standards.
According to the Electoral Code, only persons with a registered address and valid identification card or biometric passport are included in the voter register.
Acting on a prior ODHIR recommendation, the authorities launched an operation to renew expired documents of persons confined in prisons.
Voter registration is passive for in-country voting.
Voter lists are compiled by the SEC based on data from various civil and population registers.
During the public scrutiny that took place from 9 to 23 August, a total of 5,641 voters came in person to check their personal information, which resulted in 94 new inclusions, 295 deletions and 74 corrections.
The SEC closed the voter list on 7 September and the final list included 1,806,336 eligible voters.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs informed the SEC that 2,694 voters actively registered for out-of-country voting.
All IROM interlocutors acknowledged that longstanding issues related to the accuracy of the voter lists and structural deficiencies identified in previous ODIHR and PACE reports remain unaddressed.
However, despite the relevance of the turnout threshold to the referendum, the accuracy of the voter list was not cited by interlocutors as a major concern.
Although the official campaign period began on 30 July, the day of the announcement of the date for the referendum, most stakeholders intensified their activities after 10 September.
The campaign ended 48 hours before the referendum day and was generally active and peaceful throughout the country.
There were no restrictions on fundamental rights associated with the campaign, including the freedoms of assembly, association and expression.
The parliament, as the authorised proposer of the referendum, led the ‘For’ campaign, which was visible across the country and focused on the benefits of EU and NATO membership, especially to the younger generation.
The ruling party, the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM), joined together with over 100 civil society organizations to advocate for a ‘For’ vote, with the message “Go out for a European Macedonia”.
Campaign means included distribution of posters, brochures, billboards, door-to-door canvassing, as well as rallies and town hall meetings.
The campaign also relied on social media platforms to complement its activities.
Unlike the Electoral Code, the Referendum Law does not regulate the involvement of public and foreign officials in the campaign.
The prime minister, cabinet members and members of parliament actively participated in the ‘For’ campaign, and were often joined by mayors at local campaign events.
The campaign also featured a high degree of international engagement, with foreign leaders and representatives of the EU, United States, and NATO visiting Skopje to promote the bilateral agreement and to encourage turnout.
Almost all of these officials categorized the agreement as “historic” and its approval as a pre-condition for EU and NATO membership, with some officials explicitly endorsing the ‘For’ vote.
The Delegation of the European Union conducted outreach activities under the slogan “Imagine a future together”.
Many IROM interlocutors described a lack of distinction between the international activities and the national ‘For’ campaign, which was consequently bolstered.
Despite the fact that IROM interlocutors from ethnic communities and parties confirmed that they were in favour of the referendum and would encourage their followers to vote ‘For’, the campaign remained low-key in these communities.
Most ethnic Albanian and Roma parties campaigned separately with messages targeted to their communities.
The largest of these, the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI), co-ordinated with SDSM activities on occasion.
The main opposition party, Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization – Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity (VMRO-DPMNE), denounced the agreement with Greece as a “capitulation” and a threat to the country’s identity and history.
However, the party did not take an official position on the referendum, and the party president announced on 11 September that citizens should “act according to their conscience”.
A few current and former officials of VMRO-DPMNE criticized the party leadership stance, with some publicly supporting the referendum question and encouraging turnout, and others indicating their intention to vote against.
Although the party conducted no official campaign related to the referendum, it conducted an ongoing anti-government campaign, which included protest marches and social media content to criticize government policies while also condemning the agreement with Greece.
Although there was no organized “Against” campaign, 72 civic associations and two non-parliamentary political parties, United Macedonia and Voice for Macedonia, advocated a boycott to prevent the referendum from reaching a 50 per cent turnout threshold.
The boycott campaign was active through rallies and on social media, featuring nationalistic language which was often inflammatory.
There were instances of disinformation, some allegedly funded by foreign actors, but these were not picked up by traditional broadcast media and their reach remained limited to the online space.
The president, who previously refused to sign the parliament’s ratification of the agreement, announced that he would not vote in the referendum.
Allegations of pressure on civil servants and school teachers to vote were made by some ODIHR interlocutors, though concrete evidence to substantiate the allegations was not produced.
A complaint was filed with a local public prosecutor related to an alleged violation of the Criminal Code during one of the prime minister’s public campaign appearances.
Parties and other participants self-financed their campaigns through private donations.
Although the legal framework does not provide for public funding of the referendum, the government allocated MKD 80 million (some EUR 1.3 million) to the parliament in its role as authorised proposer to spend on media advertisements during the referendum campaign.
A co-ordination committee within the parliament opened a designated bank account for this public funding and made direct payments to television and radio stations for airtime.
VMRO-DPMNE criticized the decision to allocate public funds and rejected its portion of the funding, stating that this use of public financing was not in the interest of the citizens.
As a result, public funds were only spent on behalf of the ‘For’ campaign.
Several small parties and civil society organizations also objected to the use of government funds.
The legal framework for financing the referendum campaign does not include spending limits and lacks clear requirements for disclosure, auditing procedures and sanctions.
SEC regulations require only the parliament as the authorised proposer to file a campaign finance report on its use of the public funds within 30 days of the referendum.
Unlike in elections, political parties and other stakeholders are not required to account for their expenditures or donations for the referendum campaign.
The limited regulation and lack of transparency of campaign financing is at odds with international standards.
Most journalists met by the ODIHR ROM acknowledged an improved working climate and reduced political pressure in recent years.
While media outlets continue to struggle financially, especially locally, a large number of broadcasters, including over 15 television channels with national reach, operate in the country.
Television is the primary source of political information.
The ODIHR ROM commenced its media monitoring activities on 3 September.
During the monitoring period the media provided citizens with an extensive amount of information related to the referendum.
Campaign-related ads were aired regularly in private media beginning on 8 September.
Public media were not obliged to provide free airtime.
The media generally provided fair coverage.
However, the lack of any ‘Against’ campaign, combined with a ‘Boycott’ campaign conducted primarily on social media, complicated the ability of news media to present equitable coverage of both sides of the campaign.
As a result, across all broadcasters, the views expressed by the ‘For’ campaign clearly dominated.
Information related to ‘Against’ or ‘Boycott’, including critical views of the agreement or of EU and NATO, rarely exceeded 10 per cent of the airtime allocated to referendum related issues in the news programmes of each television channel monitored.
Information related to the ‘For’ campaign and items presenting views favourable or neutral to EU and NATO, amounted to some 50 per cent on most channels.
In addition, all channels dedicated a significant portion of airtime to voter information and other details of the referendum context and process.
Information extolling the benefits of EU and NATO integration was extensively presented in the media, especially in news programmes, through coverage of the government’s campaign activity and frequent state visits from EU and NATO officials.
Positively, most monitored television channels organised special programmes dedicated to the wider context of the referendum, and presented a variety of views regarding the agreement which was the subject of the referendum question.
Regulations adopted by the Agency for Audio and Audiovisual Media Services (AVMS) called for an equal division of the publicly funded airtime, with a maximum of four and a half minutes per hour for each side.
However, most media who aired paid advertisements did not always respect these limits, allocating a larger share to the ‘For’ campaign.
In addition to the official referendum campaign, spots promoting the EU and its benefits were aired as part of an official EU campaign (“EU for you”).
Civil society organisations also promoted EU and NATO membership in paid television advertisements.
In the absence of MPs advocating for ‘Against’ or ‘Boycott’, only the publicly-funded advertisements promoting the ‘For’ campaign were aired in the media.
However, at the end of the campaign, a nonparliamentary party Glas za Makedonija conducted a limited paid campaign promoting the boycott.
The AVMS monitored broadcast media from 10 September.
On 14 September, the agency issued a statement to alert media that the time allocated to ‘For’ advertisements was exceeding the permissible limits and warned broadcasters to comply with the legal framework and AVMS guidelines.
According to its first monitoring report of 25 September, the AVMS fined two broadcasters for not respecting the provision related to paid advertising.
The Referendum Law gives all voters the right to file complaints related to irregularities in voting day procedures and tabulation to the SEC within 24 hours.
However, the SEC adopted a regulation on referendum-related dispute resolution which narrowed the legal standing for citizens to file complaints.
Under this regulation, voters may file a complaint if they are included in the list of voters, were present in the polling station, and requested that the irregularity be reflected in the logbooks of the respective EBs or MECs.
The legal basis for the SEC to restrict the complaint provision is unclear.
Accredited observers are permitted by law to enter remarks in the EB logbook but they do not have the right to lodge complaints.
Under the Referendum Law, SEC decisions related to voting day procedures and results can be appealed within 48 hours to the Supreme Court.
This mechanism differs from the Electoral Code, under which the Administrative Court is the highest instance of election dispute resolution.
In addition, the shift of jurisdiction on appeals related to voter registration to the Supreme Court, made by the SEC regulations, did not appear to have a legal basis.
The SEC received 12 formal complaints prior to referendum day, which were adjudicated in closed sessions.
At the same time, the SEC received various communications, including on the applicability of provisions of the Electoral Code and the Law on Financing of Political Parties to the referendum.
In addition, a few complaints were filed with the Public Prosecutor, including challenges to the legality of certain SEC decisions.
The Constitutional Court received three applications challenging the parliament’s decision to hold the referendum, questioning, among other things, the wording and the compound character of the referendum question, the consultative nature of the referendum, and the lack of explanation of the constitutional changes envisaged in the agreement.
These applications were rejected by a majority vote which debated weaknesses in the formalities of the decision to hold the referendum and the formulation of the question, but decided that they did not amount to unconstitutionality.
The majority decided that while the Constitution requires a binding referendum to join an international community or association, the current consultative referendum does not preclude a future referendum from being called.
In addition, it was decided that the referendum question was clear because the issues contained were interrelated.
The Electoral Code and SEC regulations provide for observation of the referendum by international and citizen observers.
Under the legal framework, only the authorised proposer of the referendum, in this case the parliament, was allowed to appoint a special representative to observe the work of the referendum administration in each commission and polling station.
Despite an application by VMRODPMNE, the parliament did not appoint any.
Several political parties complained to the ODIHR ROM that the rules for observing the referendum denied them the right to observe.
The exclusion of partisan observers in polling stations, combined with the absence of party-nominated members on EBs, detracted from the overall transparency of the process and challenged OSCE commitments and international good practice.
The SEC accredited some 493 international and 11,927 citizen observers.
Two well-established citizen observer organizations deployed observers for the campaign and voting day procedures.
On referendum day, MOST deployed 1,902 observers, including some mobile teams, and ran a Parallel Vote Tabulation exercise.
The CIVIL-Center for Freedom deployed 307 accredited observers.
On the deadline to register, two additional organizations were accredited, the Macedonia Anti-Poverty Platform (MAPP) with 3,736 observers, and Agency for Civil Policies and Initiatives (IDULSJ) with 5,574.
Early voting and referendum day proceeded in an orderly manner without major irregularities.
The referendum day process was well-organized and administered professionally.
Voting, counting and tabulation procedures were generally well followed and the transparency of the process was ensured.
Citizen observers were present in 90 per cent of polling stations and tabulations centres observed.
However, IROM observers noted widespread confusion over the identity of the organizations represented by some domestic observers.
Even though there were no authorized representatives accredited by the SEC, in 91 observed polling stations citizen observers either could not identify their organization nor their duties as observers.
In some cases, these observers identified themselves as authorized representatives of the parliament, political parties or the MEC, though IROM observers determined that many were accredited for MAPP or the IDULSJ.
Also, there were several incidents of voter intimidation through the recording of voters at polling stations.
Early voting was conducted on 29 September for homebound voters and those either under home custody or in prison.
Early voting was observed in all 13 prisons in the country and 69 EBs.
Overall, the process was assessed as good or very good in 92 per cent of observations.
However, in two prisons and five EBs the process was assessed negatively.
The secrecy of the vote was not ensured in 5 observations, the ballot box was not properly sealed in 5 observations, and procedures were not followed nor understood by voters in five observations.
Citizen observers were present in 45 per cent of observations.
On referendum day, the IROM assessed the opening as good or very good in 72 of 75 observations. While most procedures were followed, in 15 cases observers noted that the ballot box was not shown to observers before being sealed and in 13 cases the opening protocol was not filled in before the polling station opened.
IROM observers were able to observe the voting process without restrictions, their assessment was positive in 98 per cent of cases.
Voting procedures were well followed and the process was transparent.
There were no major irregularities.
Two thirds of the EBs observed were chaired by a woman.
To facilitate the exercise of the voting rights of persons with impaired sight a braille tactile ballot frame was made available in 94 per cent of the polling stations observed.
In 13 per cent of observations, some voters were refused the right to vote as they were not on the voter list or not in possession of a proper ID.
While more than half of the observed polling stations were not independently accessible, the layout of the polling stations was generally adequate for persons with disabilities.
The IROM observed the counting procedures in 80 polling stations.
While the assessment was positive, IROM observers noted that not all procedures were completed fully or in the correct order.
For example, the reconciliation of signatures on the voter list against the number of unused ballots was not completed before opening the ballot box in 40 per cent of cases.
Non EB members participated in the counting, mainly citizen observers, in 12 per cent of observations.
In 47 polling stations, ballots were invalidated because they were marked with a mark other than a circle even though the intention of the voter was clear.
The overall assessment of the tabulation process in all of the 68 MECs observed was positive, with procedures generally followed in a transparent manner.
The EB chairperson was accompanied by an observer, who acknowledged themselves as a party representative, when transferring the election materials to the MEC in 22 cases.
Corrections in the results protocol were not made in a consistent manner from one MEC to another, as some conducted recounts when others solved the discrepancy by amending the protocols without recount.
On referendum day the SEC received about 40 complaints made by citizens who could not find their names on voter lists.
The SEC rejected all complaints stating that the deadline for entries in the voter lists had passed.
In a positive step, unlike for pre-referendum day complaints, SEC decisions on referendum day complaints were uploaded in the electronic system for complaint management, contributing to the transparency of the process.
However, the SEC continued to direct voters to appeal its decisions to the Supreme Court, compromising their right to legal remedy.
Skopje, 1 October 2018 – This Statement of Preliminary Findings and Conclusions is the result of a common endeavour involving the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE).
The assessment was made to determine whether the referendum complied with OSCE commitments, Council of Europe and other international obligations and standards, and with national legislation.
Both institutions involved in this International Referendum Observation Mission (IROM) have endorsed the 2005 Declaration of Principles for International Election Observation.
Ambassador Jan Petersen is the Head of the ODIHR ROM, deployed from 26 August.
Mr. Stefan Schennach headed the PACE delegation.
This Statement of Preliminary Findings and Conclusions is delivered prior to the completion of the referendum process.
The final assessment of the referendum will depend, in part, on the conduct of the remaining stages of the process, including the announcement of results and the handling of possible post-referendum day complaints or appeals.
ODIHR will issue a comprehensive final report, including recommendations for potential improvements, some eight weeks after the completion of the referendum process.
The Head of the PACE delegation will present a memorandum to the Bureau of the PACE in Helsinki on 22 November 2018.
The ODIHR ROM includes 13 experts in the capital and 20 long-term observers deployed throughout the country.
On referendum day, 206 observers from 35 countries were deployed, including 198 long-term and short-term observers deployed by ODIHR, as well as an 8-member delegation from the PACE.
Opening was observed in 77 and voting was observed in 896 polling stations across the country.
Counting was observed in 81 polling stations, and the tabulation in 73 MECs.
The IROM wishes to thank the authorities for their invitation to observe the referendum, and the State Election Commission for its assistance.
The IROM also expresses its appreciation to other institutions, political parties, media and civil society organizations, and the international community representatives for their co-operation.
OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
Election Observation Mission
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Early Parliamentary Elections, 11 December 2016
INTERIM REPORT
3 – 21 November 2016
25 November 2016
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
After two years of political crisis, the main political forces agreed to dissolve the parliament for the second time this year.
Early parliamentary elections were called for 11 December.
On 3 November, the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) established an Election Observation Mission (EOM) to observe these elections.
The  electoral  legal  framework  was  substantially  revised  in  2015.
Further  changes  in  2016 introduced temporary mechanisms for the political oversight of the electoral process, including a requirement for citizens with “questionable” voter registration data to actively register for these elections, as well as the formation of a Temporary Commission for media oversight.
The State Election Commission (SEC) official sessions have so far been open to observers and media.
However, the SEC has also met frequently in closed working sessions, where substantive discussions took place.
Most Municipal Election Commissions are operational and preparations are underway, but some lack adequate premises and equipment.
Provisions for equitable representation of ethnic groups and gender appear to be respected in the election administration.
There are 1,784,524 voters preliminarily registered for these elections.
As mistrust in the accuracy of the register persisted during previous elections, the SEC was tasked to maintain the register.
It reviewed  it  by  cross-checking  several  databases  as  well  as  by  conducting  field-checks.
As mandated by a new amendment to the Electoral Code, the SEC deleted 28,341 voters from the register who have not re-registered.
In spite of some criticism of the field-checks, a number of OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors opined that public confidence in the voter register has increased as the review process has so far led to a limited number of requests for corrections.
The SEC approved 20,629 applications for voting abroad.
Numerous applications were submitted from the same email address.
Some political parties stated to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that they have assisted voters with their applications.
The SEC registered, in a generally inclusive manner, 58 candidate lists submitted by 6 political parties and 5 coalitions.
The 40 per cent gender requirement for the lists was respected.
The lists of the two main contestants included representatives of smaller ethnic communities, some in likely winnable positions.
Several opposition parties expressed an intention to seek votes from the ethnic Albanian community.
Most political parties started mobilizing their electorate prior to the official campaign period, which began on 21 November.
The pre-election atmosphere has been generally calm, with some isolated violent incidents noted.
A number of allegations of pressure on public employees to support specific parties were reported to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM.
Public media is required to provide equitable news coverage of electoral contestants, grant access to free airtime and organize debates.
Substantial media reforms foreseen in the Przino Agreement  have yet to be agreed upon.
OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors raised concerns such as widespread self-censorship resulting from political pressure on media, and cases of inflammatory language and verbal attacks on journalists.
On 7 November, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM began qualitative and quantitative media monitoring.
Two  prominent  civil  society  organizations,  MOST  and  CIVIL,  are  observing  these  elections.
MOST plans to conduct parallel vote tabulation.
INTRODUCTION
Following an official invitation, on 3 November the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) established an Election Observation Mission (EOM) to observe the 11 December early parliamentary elections.
The EOM, headed by Tana de Zulueta, consists of a 14-member core team based in Skopje and 20 long-term observers (LTOs) deployed throughout the country on 9 November.
Mission members are drawn from 22 OSCE participating States.
Participating States  have  been  requested  to  second  300  short-term  observers  (STOs)  to  observe  election  day procedures.
BACKGROUND AND POLITICAL CONTEXT
Following the 2014 early parliamentary elections, six political parties and coalitions were represented in  the  parliament.
The  Internal  Macedonian  Revolutionary  Organization  –  Democratic  Party  for Macedonian  National  Unity  (VMRO-DPMNE),  with  61  seats,  and  the  Democratic  Union  for Integration  (DUI),  with  19  seats,  formed  the  government.
The  opposition  included  the  Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM) with 34 seats and the Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) with 7 seats.
The National Democratic Revival (NDR) and Citizens Option for Macedonia (GROM) had one seat each.
The  opposition  claimed  that  the  2014  elections  were  rigged  and  decided  to  temporarily  boycott parliament.
The crisis deepened in February 2015 with a “wiretapping scandal”, when incriminating wiretapped recordings allegedly implicated government and public officials in corruption, election fraud, abuse of power and illegal surveillance of citizens were released, which led to sustained and widespread protests.
On 2 June, as part of the Przino Agreement, early parliamentary elections were initially called for 24 April 2016.
The elections were later postponed to 5 June on the grounds that key conditions had not been met, namely cleaning of the voter register, media reforms, and safeguards to  separate state and party activities.
Prior  to  the  scheduled  elections,  the  opposition  announced  a  boycott  and,  of  the  four signatories of the Przino Agreement, only VMRO-DPMNE submitted candidate lists.
On 25 May, the Constitutional Court declared the dissolution of parliament unconstitutional and the 5 June elections were cancelled.
On 20 July, with facilitation from the European Union and United States, the four main parties reached a new agreement.
It emphasized two conditions for holding elections; enhancing the accuracy of the voter register and strengthening the media legal framework.
On 31 August, the four parties announced  that conditions for “credible elections” were met and elections were scheduled for 11 December.
On 17 October, after two years of political crisis, the parliament was dissolved for the second time this year.
ELECTORAL SYSTEM AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK
Between 120 and 123 members of parliament (MPs) will be elected for a four-year term through a proportional representation system using closed lists.
Twenty MPs will be elected from each of the six in-country electoral districts, and up to three from a single out-of-country district.
The Electoral Code permits deviations of up to five per cent from the average number of registered voters for in-country districts.
On 25 October, the Unity party challenged the holding of elections at the Constitutional Court as district 6 deviates by 5.65 per cent.
The Court has yet to decide on the matter.
Parliamentary elections are governed by a number of legal documents that include the Constitution, the Electoral Code, the Law on Political Parties, the Law on Financing Political Parties, provisions of the Criminal Code, the Law on Media and the Law on Audio and Audiovisual Media Services, which are supplemented by regulations promulgated by the State Election Commission (SEC).
The legal framework was substantially revised in 2015 as a result of the Przino Agreement.
The 2016 OSCE/ODIHR and the Council of Europe’s Venice Commission’s Joint Opinion on the Electoral Code concluded  that  many  previous  recommendations  have  been  met,  particularly  those  related  to  the principle of equal suffrage for out-of-country voting, the composition and competences of the SEC, level playing field for media coverage during the campaign period, strengthening party and campaign finance  reporting  and  auditing,  improved  provisions  for  the  separation  of  party  and  state  and introducing deadlines for courts to decide on electoral disputes.
However, it notes that the Electoral Code would benefit from a complete review in order to harmonize it internally and with other relevant laws, while some longstanding issues require further consideration, including in respect of candidate registration  and  campaigning.
Additional  changes  made  to  Electoral  Code  in  July  2016  contain provisions applicable only to the current elections.
These include forming a Temporary Commission for  media  oversight  and  requiring  citizens  with  “questionable”  voter  registration  data  to  actively register for these elections.
ELECTION ADMINISTRATION
The  elections  are  administered  by  the  State  Election  Commission  (SEC),  80  Municipal  Election Commissions (MECs), and 3,480 Electoral Boards (EBs).
An additional 46 EBs are established in diplomatic-consular offices for out-of-country voting.
The SEC is composed of nine members: three nominated by ruling parliamentary parties, three by opposition parties, and three independent experts selected in an open recruitment.
The president and deputy are elected from among the non-partisan members.
The SEC recruited temporary legal and IT personnel nominated by the main four political parties.
The SEC is supported by 34 permanent regional offices.
MECs are composed of five members who are randomly selected from among employees of the state and  municipal  administration.
While  most  MECs  are  operational  and  election  preparations  are  underway, some lack adequate premises and equipment.
EBs comprise five members – three randomly selected public employees and two appointees from the main ruling and opposition parties.
The Electoral Code provides for equitable representation of ethnic groups and gender in election administration bodies.
These requirements appear to have been met at MECs and EBs.
Two of nine SEC members are women and three are ethnic Albanians.
The SEC official sessions were open to observers and media.
However, the SEC also met in closed working sessions, where substantive discussion of matters to be decided in the public sessions took place.
The SEC decisions were generally adopted unanimously, although members often engaged in lengthy procedural discussions.
The decisions were published on the SEC website in a timely manner.
The requirement that the minutes of the SEC sessions be made public within 48 hours has not been adhered to consistently.
The SEC prepared training manuals for MECs and EBs.
MECs were trained in June and July, and a second round of training sessions is ongoing.
The training observed by the OSCE/ODIHR EOM was positively assessed by the participants and civil society.
VOTER REGISTRATION
Citizens 18 years of age by election day are eligible to vote, unless deprived of their legal capacity by a court decision.
Voter registration is passive, with the exception of voters temporarily residing abroad who must actively register.
Voting rights are granted to persons with a registered residence in the country who have a valid identification card or passport.
The SEC is responsible for maintaining the voter register based on data extracted from civil and population registers.
There are 1,784,524 voters registered for these elections as of 18 November, including 20,629 voters abroad.
Longstanding mistrust in the accuracy of the voter register persisted in the previous elections, with allegations of various illegal entries.
The SEC was tasked to review the voter register by cross-checking entries against the databases of 11 state institutions, which was followed by field checks that were observed by the four main political parties.
On 26 April, the SEC reported 44,308 voters identified as living at addresses with more than 20 registered voters or where voters with more than 6 surnames were registered.
After subsequent field checks, 39,502 voters with “questionable registration” were required to actively re-register.
On 13 November, the SEC decided to delete 28,341 voters from the register  who  did  not  re-register.
In  spite  of  criticism  of  field-checking  procedures,  a  number  of OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors opined that confidence in the voter register has increased as the process led to a limited number of corrections.
Voters can request registration or amendments to data in the voter register at SEC regional offices throughout the year.
In election years, voters can check their data also during a public scrutiny period  (this year the period was 28 October to 11 November).
In spite of the legal provision, the SEC regional offices did not display printed voter lists and voters could only check their personal data on computers at SEC offices or online.
In total, 10,274 voters visited the SEC offices, yet the number of requested corrections was low.
The SEC notified the voters about the outcome of their requests only by email, as required by law.
As such, voters without email addresses were not informed.
At the end of the public scrutiny period, the SEC had to provide electoral contestants with copies of the preliminary voter lists.
They did so with a two-day delay, caused by internal disagreements over the format of the data.
Electoral contestants can request corrections until 23 November.
The SEC approved 20,629 of 21,029 applications for voting abroad.
Numerous applications were submitted from the same email address.
Some political parties informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that they assisted voters with their applications.
Online application required voters to declare their ethnicity, which, according to the SEC, was necessary to print electoral materials in minority languages.
Voters who did not register can vote in-country at the polling station of their last residency.
CANDIDATE REGISTRATION
Any eligible voter can be a candidate for parliament, except those sentenced by a final court decision to more than six months and who have not completed their sentence.
The law also identifies a range of government and government-related positions incompatible with candidacy.
Registered  political  parties,  coalitions  of  political  parties,  and  groups  of  voters  can  nominate candidates.
The latter were required to provide at least 1,000 supporting signatures of voters residing in the respective district.
In line with a previous OSCE/ODIHR recommendation, for the first time, a voter could sign in support of more than one candidate list; however, the signatures are still required to be collected in front of a SEC employee at a regional SEC office.
Candidate  registration  was  generally  inclusive.
By  the  legal  deadline  of  11  November,  the  SEC registered 6 political parties and 5 coalitions fielding a total of 1,092 candidates on 58 lists.
In line with an enhanced quota to increase women’s participation, 41 per cent of candidates are women, although only four women are top of the lists.
CAMPAIGN AND CAMPAIGN FINANCE
The official campaign period began on 21 November and will end 24 hours before election day.
The majority of political parties, however, started mobilizing their voters prior to this period, organizing some events and establishing campaign headquarters.
Parties informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM that small scale meetings and door-to-door canvassing will be the principal methods to reach out to voters  during the campaign period.
The main campaign messages relate to the economy, employment, justice and youth emigration.
The pre-election atmosphere has been generally calm, although some violent incidents were noted.
A number of unsubstantiated allegations of pressure on public employees to support specific parties were reported to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM.
Electoral contestants are required to register a unique tax number and open a dedicated bank account for campaign finance purposes.
Individuals may donate up to EUR 3,000, while legal entities may donate up to EUR 30,000.
Foreign or anonymous donations and those from state-owned, religious and charitable organizations are prohibited.
Contestants may spend a maximum of EUR 1.8 per registered voter in a district.
Each list will be reimbursed by EUR 0.25 for each vote won, provided it obtains at least 1.5 per cent of the votes cast in the district.
Supervision of campaign finance is primarily carried out by the State Audit Office.
Contestants have to submit two interim and one final report to the SEC, State Audit Office and State Commission for Preventing Corruption.
All reports are to be published on the website of each institution.
MEDIA
The media scene includes over 130 radio and TV channels operating in a relatively small market with media outlets divided along political and ethnic lines.
Television is the most important media and the source  of  information  for  some  75  per  cent  of  the  population.
Many  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM interlocutors expressed concerns about dominant private broadcasters supporting the views of the government,  which  has  a  strong  presence  on  the  advertising  market.
Widespread  self-censorship resulting  from  political  pressure  on  media,  along  with  cases  of  inflammatory  language  by  some journalists and verbal attacks on journalists (especially by government officials) were among other concerns raised with the OSCE/ODIHR EOM.
The Electoral Code governs the media coverage of elections.
Substantial amendments in 2015 address government-financed  advertising  and  coverage  of  state  officials  favouring  political  parties  during elections.
The law requires balanced and equitable coverage during the official campaign period and obliges broadcast media and Internet portals to act in a fair and impartial manner should they cover the elections.
The public broadcaster, Macedonian Radio and Television (MRT), is additionally required to grant access to free airtime and organize debates.
Political advertising is allowed only in the private media.
Parliamentary parties are entitled to a larger proportion of news coverage, free airtime and paid advertising compared to other contestants.
Substantial media reforms foreseen in the Przino Agreement have yet to be agreed upon.
The 2016 amendments to the Electoral Code related to media are applicable only for the upcoming elections.
The editor-in-chief  of  MRT  was  appointed  by  the  opposition  100  days  prior  to  these  elections.
The supervisory role of the Agency for Audio and Audiovisual Media Services (AVMS), which is the  regulatory body for broadcast media and media coverage of elections, was supplanted by a Temporary Commission.
This five-member body includes nominees from the four main political parties, and a fifth selected by the four members, and assesses media coverage based on regular media monitoring reports prepared by the AVMS.
As of 21 November, the Commission decided on a number of cases of biased coverage, hidden campaigning by government officials and government advertising.
Based on its  recommendations,  the  AVMS  forwarded  to  the  basic  court  14  initiatives  for  misdemeanour procedures including six warnings (MRT, Nova, Alfa, and Sitel) and eight fines (Alfa, Nova, and Sitel).
So far the court decided on one Nova case, dismissing it.
On 7 November, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM commenced qualitative and quantitative media monitoring of eight television channels and five daily newspapers.
COMPLAINTS AND APPEALS
The SEC deals with most civil and administrative disputes related to elections, and the State Audit Office and the State Commission for Preventing Corruption deal with complaints related to campaign finance and misuse of administrative resources, respectively.
Their decisions may be appealed to the Administrative Court.
The basic courts deal with electoral offences, due to their criminal nature.
The Social Democratic Party of Macedonia and the People’s Movement for Macedonia appealed to the Administrative Court the SEC decisions to reject their candidate lists.
The court considered these cases in closed session, and rejected all appeals as ungrounded.
All decisions have been published on the court website.
The SEC has adopted a procedures rulebook for dealing with complaints and appeals.
An electronic system for case and complaint management, required by the Electoral Code, has been developed but is yet to be tested for these elections.
So far the SEC has received few complaints.
PARTICIPATION OF NATIONAL MINORITIES
Inter-ethnic relations remain a relevant political factor, and political parties tend to reach out mainly to their  own  communities.
Parties  representing  minorities  other  than  ethnic  Albanians  expressed dissatisfaction to the OSCE/ODHIR EOM for having been excluded from the political process that led to scheduling elections for 11 December.
They also voiced concern that the electoral system provides no mechanisms to promote national minority participation, such as reserved or guaranteed seats in the parliament,  which,  in  turn,  forces  them  to  join  coalitions  led  by  parties  representing  larger communities.
Some concerns were expressed to the OSCE/ODHIR EOM on the extent to which the list of disputed voters, and the need for them to actively re-register, was not adequately advertised to reach all communities.
The SDSM and VMRO-DPMNE coalitions included in their lists representatives of almost all smaller communities, some in likely winnable positions.
The SDSM voiced its aim to seek votes from the ethnic  Albanian  community.
The  electoral  contest  is  more  competitive  in  the  ethnic  Albanian communities, with the coalition Alliance for Albanians and BESA challenging the dominant position of  DUI.
Despite initial disagreements, most leaders of different parties representing the Roma community decided to run in the VMRO-DPMNE coalition.
CITIZEN AND INTERNATIONAL OBSERVERS
The Electoral Code allows for citizen, partisan and international observation.
Two prominent civil society organizations are observing these elections: MOST has 80 LTOs and intends to deploy some 3,300 STOs, and also plans to conduct parallel vote tabulation; CIVIL has 35 LTOs, 10 mobile teams and intends to deploy some 300 STOs.
MISSION ACTIVITIES
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM commenced its work in Skopje on 3 November.
The Head of Mission met with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the SEC, and representatives of political parties, media, civil society organizations, the OSCE Mission to Skopje and the international community.
The EOM established  contacts  with  electoral  stakeholders  at  all  levels.
The  OSCE  Parliamentary  Assembly (OSCE  PA),  the  Parliamentary  Assembly  of  the  Council  of  Europe  (PACE)  and  the  European Parliament (EP) intend to deploy observer delegations for election day observation.
The English version of this report is the only official document.
Unofficial translations are available in the Macedonian and Albanian languages.
THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
15 October and 29 October 2017
OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation Mission Final Report
SUMMARY
Following  an  invitation  from  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  to  observe  the  15 October  2017 municipal elections, the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) deployed an Election Observation Mission (EOM) on 13 September.
The mission remained in the  country to follow the second round on 29 October.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM assessed compliance of  the elections with OSCE commitments, other international obligations and standards for democratic  elections and national legislation.
For the first round on 15 October, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM was  joined by a delegation from the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe  to form an International Election Observation Mission (IEOM).
Each institution involved in this  IEOM has endorsed the 2005 Declaration of Principles for International Election Observation.
The statement of Preliminary Findings and Conclusions issued by the IEOM after the first round  concluded  that  municipal  elections  “contributed  to  strengthening  confidence  in  the  democratic  process.
Elections were held in a competitive environment with candidates generally able to campaign  without restriction and fundamental freedoms were overall respected.
However, credible allegations of  vote-buying, pressure on voters and isolated cases of violence occurred during the pre-election period.
Overall, monitored media provided unbiased coverage of contestants and facilitated the opportunity  for political debate.
Despite organizational challenges, the election administration ensured that voters  were able to exercise their voting rights”.
The statement of Preliminary Findings and Conclusions issued by the OSCE/ODIHR EOM after the  second round concluded that “mayoral elections were competitive and the respect for fundamental  freedoms contributed towards the conduct of democratic elections.
The campaign was short and  subdued, with parties vying for support from beyond their traditional base though occasionally using  aggressive  rhetoric.
Isolated  cases  of  misuse  of  administrative  resources  and  vote-buying  were  reported.
Media continued providing balanced coverage of contestants, but this was overshadowed by  negative  campaigning  spots.
Election  day  was  overall  professionally  managed,  although  the  performance of polling staff during counting could have been enhanced”.
The legal framework guarantees fundamental rights and freedoms and generally forms a sound basis  for the conduct of democratic elections.
While amendments to the Electoral Code (EC) in recent years  addressed a number of prior OSCE/ODIHR and Council of Europe recommendations, shortcomings  remain, including undue restrictions on independent candidate registration, limited rights for legal  redress and insufficient provisions for second rounds.
In addition, a late revision of the EC relating to  the SEC’s composition challenged the stability of the electoral process, at odds with international  good practice.
The SEC was able to administer both rounds of the elections, yet it functioned along political lines.
Its  internal controversies resulted in missed deadlines and some of its decisions were in contradiction  with the legislation.
The SEC did not adequately plan for the second round, failed to implement a  comprehensive voter education programme and, overall, lacked genuine transparency.
Generally, mid- level commissions effectively performed their duties and some took additional measures to enhance transparency and stakeholders’ trust in the administration of the elections.
Positively, some steps to  facilitate voting rights for persons with disabilities were introduced.
Some 1.8 million voters were registered for the elections.
During online and in-person verification, only a small number of changes were requested, signalling growing confidence in the accuracy of the list.
However, voters whose identification documents (IDs) expired or were to expire before the elections were excluded from the list, and thus effectively disenfranchised.
This also applied to prisoners who were not able to update their IDs.
In addition, the law does not provide for updating the lists between the rounds, hence voters who turned 18 during this period were not able to exercise their voting rights.
The law also restricts suffrage rights for persons declared legally incompetent due to a disability, contrary to international obligations.
Following an inclusive registration process, 19 political parties and coalitions and 65 groups of voters fielded a total of 258 mayoral candidates and 370 candidates lists for council elections.
Five per cent of candidate lists did not comply with the gender quota requirements, but were still registered.
Voters were offered a range of choices, and highly-contested races took place in many municipalities.
The campaign took place in an environment where fundamental freedoms of assembly and expression were generally respected.
However, isolated politically-motivated incidents occurred and credible allegations  of  vote-buying  and  pressure  on  voters  persisted.
Campaign  strategies  were  designed centrally  and  modified  prior  to  the  second  round  to  target  undecided  voters.
Misuse  of  local government  functions  and  administrative  resources  was  observed  in  several  municipalities  and concerns were raised when the Prime Minister openly pledged government support for municipalities with mayors from the ruling coalition.
This challenged the separation of state and party which is provided for by the OSCE commitments.
Campaign finance regulations, improved in recent years in line with OSCE/ODIHR and Council of Europe recommendations, generally provide for a level playing field and a degree of transparency.
However, the latter was not fully realized due to untimely submission of reports, a lack of auditing requirements for interim campaign finance reports and enforcement provisions, as well as limited oversight authority of the State Audit Office.
It reduced voters’ ability to make an informed choice.
The legal framework provides for balanced and unbiased media coverage of the campaign.
The public media offered all contestants free airtime, but only a few used it.
The two larger parties dominated in paid  advertising  on  private  media.
Debates  were  well  organized,  yet  not  all  invited  candidates participated.
The effectiveness of adjudicating media-related offences was undermined by the courts missing legal deadlines and imposing lower penalties than prescribed by law.
Provisions to enhance gender equality were not always respected and the promotion of women’s participation in public life was not featured in campaigns.
The 30 per cent gender quota was met in the SEC composition, but not consistently upheld at lower levels of election administration.
Fourteen per cent of all lists were led by women, while of all mayoral candidates, a mere six per cent were women.
Interethnic relations played a limited role in the elections.
While some parties sought votes across ethnic  lines,  most  candidate  lists  reflected  the  ethnic  composition  of  a  particular  municipality.
Confrontational intra-ethnic rhetoric was noted in municipalities where parties belonging to the same coalition at the national level competed locally.
One serious election-related incident exposing a high degree of polarization in the Roma community occurred in Shuto Orizari district of Skopje.
The legal framework does not fully provide for effective legal redress in electoral disputes, with most decisions  of  the  election  administration  not  subject  to  judicial  review,  contrary  to  OSCE commitments.
While many allegations of corrupt election-related practices were raised countrywide, few complaints were filed with relevant authorities.
Many OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors cited lack of trust in the ability of the election administration and courts to impartially handle cases.
Citizen observer access to all stages of the electoral process contributed to transparency and offered a non-partisan assessment of the elections.
In total, some 3,000 citizen observers were accredited to follow election day proceedings.
In addition, in several municipalities civil society made efforts to foster  greater  inclusion  of  persons  with  disabilities  and  vulnerable  communities  in  the  election process.
Both election days were generally well organised and were orderly in most parts of the country.
However,  some  reoccurring  irregularities,  including  family/group  voting  and  compromised  vote secrecy were noted.
Procedural irregularities observed during the counting detracted from the positive assessment in both rounds.
Tabulation improved in the second round.
Also, after the second round, an immediate online publication of results by polling stations enhanced transparency.
The  SEC  received  many  complaints  alleging  irregularities  on  election  day  which  could  have constituted grounds for annulment.
In both rounds all complaints were rejected.
Cases were decided in open sessions and complaints and decisions published online, contributing to transparency.
However, the manner in which many complaints were handled challenged the rule of law and due process, contrary to OSCE commitments and leaving substantiated cases without effective legal redress.
The Administrative Court upheld all but one of the SEC decisions that were appealed.
Overall, the 2017 municipal elections were perceived as an important milestone in building the new government’s credibility and contributed to strengthening confidence in the democratic process.
The SEC certified the election results on 14 November, yet the outcome was not accepted across the political spectrum.
The governing coalition endorsed the process, but the main opposition party refused to recognize the results due to alleged unsubstantiated widespread violations throughout the electoral process.
Nevertheless, a peaceful transition of power across municipalities took place.
This report offers a number of recommendations to support efforts to bring elections in the host country further in line with OSCE commitments and other international obligations and standards for democratic elections.
Priority recommendations relate to the need for an inclusive and timely legal reform, equal suffrage rights, transparency and accountability of the election administration, measures to ensure a level playing field in the campaign, the transparency in campaign finance, and the right to effective remedies.
The OSCE/ODIHR stands ready to assist the authorities to improve the electoral framework and process and to address the recommendations contained in this and previous reports.
INTRODUCTION AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Following an invitation from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) established an Election Observation Mission (EOM) to observe the 15 October municipal elections.
The EOM remained in the country for the 29 October second round.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM, headed by Ambassador Audrey Glover, comprised a 17-member core team based in Skopje and 20 long-term observers deployed throughout the country.
For the 15 October election day the OSCE/ODIHR EOM was joined by a 13-member delegation from the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe (Congress) from 12 Member States of the Council of Europe to form an International Election Observation Mission (IEOM).
Each institution involved in this IEOM has endorsed the 2005 Declaration of Principles for International Election Observation.
In total, 208 observers were deployed, and OSCE/ODIHR observers were drawn from 31 OSCE participating States.
For the second round on 29 October, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM included 17 experts in the capital, 17 long-term observers and 88 short-term observers deployed throughout the country.
Observers were drawn from 25 OSCE participating States.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM assessed compliance of the electoral process with OSCE commitments, other international obligations and standards for democratic elections and with national legislation.
This final report follows Statements of Preliminary Findings and Conclusions for the first and second rounds,  which  were  released  at  press  conferences  in  Skopje  on  16  October  and  30  October, respectively.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM wishes to thank the authorities for the invitation to observe the elections, and the State Election Commission (SEC) and other authorities for their assistance.
It also wishes to express its appreciation to civil society, political parties, media, and other institutions for sharing their views with the mission, as well as the international community representatives for their co-operation.
BACKGROUND AND POLITICAL CONTEXT
After  the  2016  early  parliamentary  elections,  the  formation  of  the  government  proved  to  be  a challenge.
In February 2017, the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization – Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity (VMRO-DPMNE) which won the most seats in parliament, failed to reach an agreement with its traditional coalition partner, the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI).
The DUI and other ethnic Albanian parties aligned with the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM), yet the president did not give them a mandate to form the government.
The crisis escalated on 27 April, when after several unsuccessful attempts, an ethnic Albanian speaker of the parliament was elected.
This triggered a confrontation in the parliament and resulted in a physical assault on its members, including senior members of the SDSM and Alliance for Albanians (AA).
The political crisis de-escalated only after the president gave the mandate to the SDSM to form the government, which, following a six-month delay, was established on 31 May.
Subsequently, municipal elections were postponed until 15 October.
In July, the government endorsed economic, judicial  and  political  reforms  and  a  plan  to  address  concerns  on  the  misuse  of  administrative resources, pressure on public employees, unbalanced media coverage and lack of transparency of the election administration.
The  country’s  long-standing  aspirations  to  join  the  European  Union  (EU)  and  NATO,  the continuously  high  unemployment  and  emigration  rates  formed  the  backdrop  to  these  elections.
Notably, the conduct of municipal elections was perceived by most OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors as having an impact on the ongoing EU and NATO integration processes.
ELECTORAL SYSTEM AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK
Municipal elections are held every four years to elect mayors and councils in 80 municipalities and the City of Skopje.
Councillors are elected by proportional representation through closed candidate lists.3 Mayors are elected through a two-round majoritarian system.
If no mayoral candidate receives more than 50 per cent of all votes cast in the first round, a second round is held within two weeks.
For the first round, a one-third voter turnout is required for mayoral elections; otherwise, the election is repeated for the corresponding municipality.
There is no turnout requirement for the second round.
The elections are primarily governed by the 1991 Constitution and the 2006 Electoral Code (EC).
The  Constitution  establishes  a  broad  range  of  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms  that  underpin democratic elections, including the protection of minority rights.
The EC has undergone a series of positive amendments since its adoption and generally provides a sound basis for the conduct of democratic elections.
Many of the amendments were in line with prior OSCE/ODIHR and Council of Europe’s Commission for Democracy through Law (Venice Commission) recommendations, with key changes improving the framework for separation of state and party, and campaign finance regulation.
However, some significant limitations, gaps and ambiguities relating to a number of aspects remain, including some noted in previous OSCE/ODIHR and Venice Commission recommendations.
These relate  to,  among  others,  voting  rights,  candidate  registration,  electoral  dispute  resolution  and, notwithstanding improvements, campaign finance regulations.
In addition, despite amendments, the EC does not comprehensively and clearly regulate all aspects of the second round, at times leading to an inconsistent application of the law.
This relates, for example, to voter list updates, applications for homebound  voting,  replacement  of  Election  Board  (EB)  members,  campaign  donation  limits, allocation of billboard and poster space, and the accreditation of observers.
In 2017, two key amendments to the EC were introduced.
Due to the delayed formation of the government, the timing of municipal elections was changed from May to October and the mandates of the sitting mayors extended.
In addition, just weeks prior to the elections and contrary to good practice that recommends maintaining a stable electoral framework, the parliament was mandated to change the composition of the State Election Commission (SEC) to align it with the new composition of parliament.
Moreover,  this  change  was  enacted  under  an  expedited  procedure,  without  broad consultation  which  is  at  odds  with  OSCE  commitments.
The  late  adoption  undermined  the opportunity to seek timely judicial review of the amendment.
The Electoral Code should be comprehensively reviewed to address identified shortcomings, gaps and ambiguities,  including  provisions  for  second  round  of  elections,  to  bring  it  in  line  with  OSCE commitments, international obligations and good practice.
The review and amendments should be conducted in a public procedure, after a broadly inclusive consultation process and sufficiently in advance of the next election.
Regulations adopted by the SEC supplement the EC.
However, the timing and substance of changes to the regulatory framework at times challenged the integrity of the electoral process.
The SEC approved and amended some regulations during the electoral period, at times on a last minute or retroactive basis.
Some regulations contradicted the law, such as the rules on the implementation of the gender quota  and  on  the  order  of  contestants  on  the  ballot.
Moreover,  timely  judicial  review  of  SEC regulations is not provided for in the legislation.
The SEC should maintain a stable regulatory framework and refrain from amending the rules during an electoral period, except to address emergency matters.
The SEC should ensure that applicable rules are not contrary to or inconsistent with the EC.
Consideration could be given to introducing an expedited process for challenges to the legality of election-related legislation and regulations.
ELECTION ADMINISTRATION
The municipal elections were administered by a three-level election administration, comprising the SEC, 80 Municipal Election Commissions (MECs) and the Election Commission for the City of Skopje, and 3,480 EBs.
The second round was administered by 35 MECs where second rounds occurred and the 1,517 EBs under them.
The SEC is supported by 34 regional offices and a secretariat made up of civil servants.
Despite organizational challenges, the election administration generally ensured that voters had the opportunity to exercise their rights.
Based on the 2015 Przino Agreement, the EC was amended to change the SEC’s composition from a political to a mixed model and from seven to nine members.
Three SEC members have no political affiliation and are selected through open competition and the other six reflect the political composition of the parliament.
The non-partisan members’ five-year tenure is reasonably protected, while party nominees, following the 2017 amendments to the EC, had to be changed to align the composition of the SEC to the current parliament.
Accordingly, on 22 September, a BESA member replaced the sitting Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) member.
The late change in the composition of the SEC was against international good practice.
Furthermore, one SEC member was under indictment for misuse of office in 2013 municipal elections, thus compromising the public perception of the SEC.
During the electoral period, the SEC did not always respect its internal procedures or members’ terms of reference.
SEC members’ unnecessary involvement in the work of its secretariat resulted in missed deadlines, affecting primarily voter education and printing the braille ballot templates.
Also, during the SEC’s discussions on politically contentious issues such as complaints on denial of homebound voting, members lacked a collegial and professional approach and decisions were driven by party-nominated commissioners’ political positioning, rather than by efficient and effective practise.
The SEC members should adhere to the legal requirement of impartiality and established procedures and respect the terms of reference set out for SEC members and the secretariat.
The work of the MECs was largely assessed positively by the OSCE/ODIHR EOM, and stakeholders generally placed trust in the MECs’ actions and decisions.
MECs comprise five members, who are public servants, randomly selected for a five-year term by a computer-generated algorithm.
EBs are composed of two political appointees and three non-partisan members.
The pool of public servants, from which MEC and EB members are drawn, is perceived by OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors as politicised  and  the  selection  process  as  such  is  not  transparent,  affecting  trust  in  the  election administration.
For example, concerns were raised by the OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors over MEC members in Lipkovo who were perceived as supporters of the incumbent mayor.
To ensure that MEC and EB members possess appropriate professional experience and/or to reduce perception  of  bias  in  the  election  administration,  their  selection  process  should  be  made  more transparent by publishing the list of prospective MEC and EB members, opening the computer programme for third party verification and facilitating observation of the process.
The EC sets ethnic and gender balance requirements in the composition of election administration at all levels.
The gender requirement was met in the SEC, where three commissioners were women.
In 13 MECs the gender quota was not upheld.
Positively, 28 per cent of MECs had a female president.
Countrywide data on a gender breakdown in EBs was not available.
Appointments of EB members began in August and a few changes in the EBs continued throughout the country until after the first round, mainly due to the family or health reasons.
The election administration is required by law to make its work public.
However, in practice, the SEC lacked genuine transparency.
While SEC sessions were open to the media and observers, they were not always announced in advance and substantive decisions were frequently made in closed meetings.
Not all SEC regulations, decisions and guidelines were made public and the SEC’s rules of procedure, which stipulate that the minutes should be posted within a week of a session, were often disregarded.
The SEC and the secretariat made some efforts to improve transparency between the rounds, but delays in posting key information and minutes online continued, as did the practice of decision-making in closed meetings.
The  level  of  transparency  of  MECs  varied.
While  most  did  not  apply  measures  to  enhance transparency, some took initiatives to increase trust in their work.
For instance, the MEC in Novo Selo maintained a Facebook page, while the MEC in Jegunovce proactively informed stakeholders about its meetings and afterwards distributed minutes.
In order to increase transparency and public confidence in their work, the SEC and MECs should make their regulations, guidelines, decisions and minutes of sessions, including those related to procurement, public in a timely manner.
Before the first round, the SEC delivered three sets of timely and consistent training sessions to MEC members, who in turn trained EBs on candidate registration, early voting, and voting, counting and tabulation procedures.
Nevertheless, on election day, filling in the results protocols proved to be a challenge for many EBs, hence, the SEC’s secretariat identified EBs and MECs in need of additional training before the second round.
Those training sessions were neither standardised nor nationwide and those observed by the OSCE/ODIHR EOM were assessed as insufficient.
Positively, six MECs organised trainings for EBs on their own initiative.
The SEC also missed the opportunity to provide additional  guidance  and  clarify  instructions  for  MECs  on  how  to  correct  results  protocols  with numerical errors, which was a source of confusion during the tabulation in the first round.
To improve MECs and EBs capacity and to ensure consistent conduct of elections, the SEC should provide timely and uniform trainings, in particular, on completing result protocols.
Local governments are responsible for financing municipal elections, although some failed to budget adequately.
Municipalities whose accounts were blocked by a court decision due to unpaid debts were to receive funding from the state budget.
Upon SEC’s requests, the Ministry of Finance allocated MKD 38 million for 19 such municipalities, based on costs of previous elections.
However, the SEC did not transfer the money in time, nor foresaw budget for a possible second round.
Seven MECs made up financial shortfalls from their members’ personal funds; at least 14 MECs lacked adequate premises and equipment.
Municipalities should ensure adequate and timely financial and operational planning, providing MECs with the necessary resources well ahead of elections.
In addition, the relevant authorities should ensure that funds for any municipalities, including with blocked accounts, are transferred on time.
The SEC did not properly fulfil its duty to provide voter education.