INTERNATIONAL ELECTION OBSERVATION MISSION
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Municipal Elections, 15 October 2017
STATEMENT OF PRELIMINARY FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
PRELIMINARY CONCLUSIONS
The holding of the 15 October municipal elections contributed to strengthening confidence in the democratic process.
Elections were held in a competitive environment with candidates generally able to campaign without restriction and fundamental freedoms were overall respected.
However, credible allegations of vote-buying, pressure on voters and isolated cases of violence occurred during the pre-election period.
Overall, monitored media provided unbiased coverage of contestants and facilitated the opportunity for political debate.
Despite organizational challenges, the election administration ensured that voters were able to exercise their voting rights.
Election day generally proceeded orderly, although some procedural irregularities were observed.
The legal framework provides for fundamental rights and freedoms, including the protection of minority rights, and forms a sound basis for the conduct of democratic elections.
While amendments in recent years addressed a number of prior OSCE/ODIHR and Council of Europe recommendations, shortcomings remain, including restrictions on independent candidate registration and limited rights for legal redress.
A late revision of the Electoral Code that resulted in a change to the composition of the State Election Commission (SEC) is at odds with international good practice.
Overall, while the SEC was able to administer the elections, its discussions on politically contentious issues and unnecessary involvement in the operational work of its secretariat at times resulted in missed deadlines.
This delayed the SEC’s comprehensive voter education campaign.
Some SEC regulations  contradicted  the  legislation.
SEC  sessions  were  open  to  observers,  yet  frequently substantive decisions were made in closed meetings.
Only a few mid-level commissions undertook initiatives to enhance transparency of their work.
Positively, steps to facilitate voting rights for persons with disabilities were introduced.
A total of 1,814,644 voters were registered for the elections.
During online and in-person verification of voter lists, only a small number of changes was requested.
As a result, many interlocutors of international observers acknowledged growing confidence in the integrity of the voter register, while some continued to express concern, including on the implementation of the residency requirement.
Following an inclusive registration process, 19 political parties and coalitions and 65 groups of voters fielded a total of 258 mayoral candidates and 370 candidate lists for council elections.
Voters were offered a range of choices, and highly-contested races took place in many municipalities.
The SEC composition met with the 30 per cent gender representation requirement in the election administration.
However, it was not always respected at lower levels.
Not all candidate lists complied with  the  legal  requirements  for  gender  balance,  yet  these  were  registered.
Issues  pertaining  to women’s participation in public life were not addressed in the campaign.
The legislation comprehensively regulates campaigning and generally provides for a level playing field.
The campaign took place in an environment where fundamental freedoms of assembly and expression  were  generally  respected.
However,  isolated  politically-motivated  incidents  occurred related  to  attacks  on  campaign  offices  and  violence  against  one  candidate.
The  larger  parties  campaigned on national matters of stability and integration, as well as issues of municipal services and infrastructure.
While  campaign  finance  regulations  have  improved  in  recent  years  in  line  with  previous recommendations,  they  did  not  fully  ensure  adequate  transparency  due  to  a  lack  of  auditing requirements for interim reports, as well as insufficient oversight authority of the State Audit Office.
Only a small portion of interim reports were submitted.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM media monitoring showed that the public media provided all contestants with free airtime during prime time, but only a small number of candidates used it.
The two larger parties dominated in paid advertising on private media.
TV debates were well organized; however, not all  invited  candidates  participated.
The  media  authority  responsible  for  ensuring  balanced  and unbiased election coverage, initiated six misdemeanour proceedings on media violations.
Interethnic relations played a role in the elections.
While some parties sought votes across ethnic lines, most  candidate  lists  reflected  the  ethnic  composition  of  a  particular  municipality.
Some confrontational campaigning was observed between candidates belonging to the same community.
The legal framework does not fully provide for effective legal redress in electoral disputes, contrary to OSCE commitments.
The SEC received few pre-election day complaints.
While concerns were raised on the misuse of administrative resources, vote-buying and pressure on voters, only a few complaints were filed with other authorities, some of which are under investigation.
A number of interlocutors informed the OSCE/ODIHR EOM and the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe that they lacked trust in the ability of the election administration and courts to handle election-related cases impartially.
Citizen observer access to all stages of the process contributed to transparency and offered a non-partisan assessment of  the elections.
In total, 3,000 citizen observers  were accredited to  follow election day proceedings.
Early voting and election day progressed in an orderly manner in most parts of the country.
Polling staff  generally  efficiently  facilitated  voting  and  adhered  to  prescribed  procedures.
However, international  observers  noted  some  reoccurring  irregularities,  including  family/group  voting  and compromised  vote  secrecy.
During  tabulation,  most  MECs  followed  procedures.
In  14  MECs, observers did not have a sufficient view of the data entry process, which limited transparency.
The SEC started releasing preliminary results shortly after polls closed, which contributed to transparency; however, results were not disaggregated by polling station, limiting their scrutiny.
PRELIMINARY FINDINGS
Background
After  the  2016  early  parliamentary  elections,  the  formation  of  the  government  proved  to  be  a challenge.
The  Internal  Macedonian Revolutionary  Organization-Democratic Party for Macedonia National Unity (VMRO-DPMNE) failed to reach an agreement with its traditional coalition partner, the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI).
Instead, the DUI and other ethnic Albanian parties aligned with the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM), yet the president did not give them a mandate to form the government.
On 27 April, after several unsuccessful attempts, the speaker of the parliament was elected, which triggered a confrontation in the parliament and resulted in an assault on its members, including senior  members of the SDSM and Alliance for Albanians (AA).
The political crisis de-escalated only after the president gave a mandate to the SDSM to form the government, which was established on 31 May, following a six-month delay.
This delay resulted in the postponement of municipal elections.
In July, the government endorsed economic, judicial and political reforms, as well as a plan to address the misuse of administrative resources, pressure on public employees, unbalanced media coverage and lack of transparency of the election administration.
The  country’s  long  standing  aspirations  to  join  the  European  Union  (EU)  and  NATO,  the continuously high unemployment rate and high emigration formed the backdrop to these elections.
The conduct of municipal elections was perceived by most OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors as a test of the new government’s credibility, impacting the ongoing EU and NATO integration processes.
Currently, 55 of the 80 municipalities are governed by the VMRO-DPMNE, while the SDSM has 4 party-affiliated mayors.
Legal Framework and Electoral System
The elections are primarily governed by the 1991 Constitution and the 2006 Electoral Code (EC).
The Constitution establishes fundamental rights and freedoms, including the protection of minority rights, while the EC generally provides a sound basis for the conduct of democratic elections.
The EC has undergone a series of positive amendments since its adoption, of which many are in line with prior OSCE/ODIHR  and  Council  of  Europe’s  Commission  for  Democracy  through  Law  (Venice Commission) recommendations, particularly related to the separation of state and party, and campaign finance regulations.
However, shortcomings pertaining to a number of aspects of the legislation remain, including undue restrictions on independent candidate registration and limited rights for legal redress.
In 2017, two key amendments to the EC were introduced: the timing of municipal elections was changed from May to October, and the parliament was authorized to change the composition of the State  Election  Commission  (SEC).
SEC  regulations  supplement  various  aspects  of  the  election legislation.
However, some regulations were approved or amended late and some contradicted the legislation.
These combined factors challenged the integrity of the electoral process.
Municipal elections are held every four years to elect mayors and councils in 80 municipalities and the City of Skopje.
Councillors are elected by proportional representation through closed lists.
Mayors are  elected  through  a  two-round  majoritarian  system.
Runoffs  will  be  held  on  29  October  for municipalities in which no candidate received more than 50 per cent of the votes cast.
For mayoral elections, only the first round requires a one-third voter turnout.
Election Administration
The municipal elections were administered by a three-level election administration, comprising the SEC, 80 Municipal Election Commissions (MECs) and the Election Commission for the City of Skopje, and 3,480 Election Boards (EBs).
The SEC comprises nine members, three of whom are women.
By law, three SEC members have no political affiliation and are selected through open competition.
The other six reflect the political composition of the parliament.
The non-partisan members’ five-year tenure is reasonably protected, while party nominees, following the September amendment to the EC, must be changed to align the composition of the SEC to the current parliament.
Accordingly, on 22 September, a BESA member replaced the sitting Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) member.
Furthermore, one current SEC member is under indictment in a case relating to a misuse of office during municipal elections in 2013, thus compromising the public perception of the SEC.
MECs comprise five members, randomly selected from among municipal-level civil servants.
EBs are composed of two political appointees and three non-partisan members.
Some EB members were appointed late.
The SEC delivered three rounds of timely and consistent training to MEC members, who in turn trained the EBs.
Despite organizational challenges, the election administration generally ensured that voters had the opportunity to exercise their voting rights.
By law, the election administration is required to make its work public, while in practice, the SEC lacked genuine transparency.
SEC sessions were open to observers, yet frequently substantive decisions were made in closed meetings.
The publication of session minutes was delayed and not all SEC decisions, regulations and guidelines were available on its website.
In addition, the SEC’s discussions on politically contentious issues and unnecessary involvement in the operational work of its secretariat at times resulted in missed deadlines.
This also delayed the SEC’s comprehensive voter education campaign.
The level of transparency of MECs varied.
While most did not apply measures to enhance transparency, some took the initiative to increase trust in their work.
Local  governments  are  responsible  for  financing  elections.
Municipalities  whose  accounts  were blocked by a court decision due to unpaid debts received funding from the state budget.
At least 14 MECs lacked adequate premises and equipment, and faced further financial difficulties.
Despite these challenges, MECs generally worked in a professional manner.
The EC includes a 30 per cent gender representation criteria in the election administration, but this was  not  consistently  respected.
Thirteen  MECs  did  not  meet  the  gender  quota.
Although  not required by law, 28 per cent of MECs had a female president.
For the first time, to facilitate voting rights for persons with disabilities, the SEC, in co-operation with civil society, mapped polling stations that were wheelchair accessible and placed this information online.
It also produced Braille ballot sleeves for some polling stations.
Voter Registration
All citizens who reached the age of 18 years have the right to vote, except those declared legally incapacitated  by  a  court  decision.
Such  a  restriction  is  at  odds  with  OSCE  commitments  and international obligations.
Only persons with a registered address in the respective municipality and a valid identification card or a biometric passport are included in the voter register.
Voter registration is passive.
The SEC maintains the voter register based on data extracted from civil and population registers.
Four times a year, it updates the register based on data provided by various state agencies.
The day after an election is called, a supplementary update of the voter register is conducted.
The SEC has the right to undertake random inspections for accuracy.
For these elections, the SEC did not deem it necessary to undertake a comprehensive verification of the voter register.
During public scrutiny, more than 220,000 voters checked their data online and in-person, but only 230 requested corrections.
A limited number of changes were also requested by political parties.
As a result, many interlocutors of international observers acknowledged growing confidence in the integrity  of  the  voter  register,  while  some  continued  to  express  concern,  including  on  the implementation of the residency requirement.
A total of 1,814,644 voters were registered for these elections.
The SEC approved final voter lists on 25 September, a day after the official deadline.
Printed voter lists were sent to MECs, which were then delivered to the EBs on 13 October.
Candidate Registration
Any eligible voter residing in the respective municipality can stand for the elections, except those in prison or waiting to serve a prison term of more than six months.
Registered parties, coalitions and groups of voters have the right to nominate candidates.
The latter are required to support a nomination with signatures from 0.2 to 4.8 per cent of eligible voters residing in the respective municipality.
A voter could sign in support of more than one candidate and candidate list.
However, the signatures are required to be collected in front of a SEC representative.
Following an inclusive registration process, 19 parties and coalitions, and 65 groups of voters fielded a total of 370 council lists and 258 mayoral candidates, including 19 independents.
Candidate lists were  published  on  25  September  and  displayed  at  MEC  offices,  enabling  voters  to  familiarize themselves with their prospective candidates.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM is aware of the rejection of  five candidate lists, which were appealed to and dismissed by the Administrative Court.
Contrary to the EC, the SEC held two lotteries on candidate order on the ballot; one for parties and coalitions, and the other for groups of voters.
The latter were placed at the bottom of the list.
To enhance gender equality, the EC requires candidate lists to include not less than 40 per cent of the less represented gender.
In addition, one in every three, plus one in every ten spots must be for the less represented gender.
However, these requirements were undermined by a SEC regulation.
Of the mayoral candidates, 16 were women (6 per cent); and 14 per cent of council lists were headed by women.
MECs registered 9 lists with fewer than 40 per cent women candidates and 17 lists that did not place women on required spots.
The respective MECs attributed this noncompliance to oversight and arithmetic errors.
However, the OSCE/ODIHR EOM was also informed that one MEC that received a list with too few male candidates requested it to be corrected.
There was no opportunity to seek legal redress against approved lists.
Campaign Environment
The official campaign commenced on 25 September and ended at midnight on 13 October.
The EC comprehensively regulates campaigning and generally provides for a level playing field, though independent candidates are not fully granted equitable conditions, such as designated billboard space and media coverage.
The law aims to protect voters from undue pressure and prevent vote-buying.
Various restrictions aim to uphold a separation of the state and party, as well as ban the misuse of administrative resources.
Prior to the official campaign, the government adopted a Declaration on Free and Fair Elections, calling on public and state officials to refrain from fraudulent activities and respect voters’ right to choose freely.
On 24 September at the SEC and MECs, the majority of mayoral candidates signed a Code of Conduct pledging to uphold the law.
The  campaign  took  place  in  an  environment  in  which  fundamental  freedoms  of  assembly  and expression were generally respected.
Voters were offered a range of choices and highly-contested races took place in many municipalities.
Campaigns commenced with festive rallies, where party leaders presented their candidates, unveiled campaign slogans, and outlined policy platforms.
Four of  the  largest  parties  held  rallies  in  administrative  centres,  while  also  relying  on  door-to-door canvassing  and  small-scale  meetings.
Smaller  parties  and  independent  candidates  ran  modest campaigns where they presented their visions for local development.
A number of smaller parties complained to the OSCE/ODIHR EOM about the lack of a level playing field during campaigning.
Overall,  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  interlocutors  consistently  noted  an  improvement  in  the  campaign environment and conduct.
Strategies for municipal campaigns were drawn up at the central level and implemented locally.
The larger parties campaigned on national issues of stability and integration and linked them to local issues of water, sanitation and infrastructure.
The VRMO-DPNME, and to a lesser extent, the SDSM, used negative messages during rallies.
From 25 September, large billboards started to appear in urban  centres, predominantly featuring mayoral candidates.
Parties also opened temporary campaign offices where centrally produced campaign goods were distributed.
During  rallies,  female  candidates  were  often  on  the  main  stage,  but  rarely  spoke.
Also  within campaign management teams, women did not hold leadership positions.
None of the parties addressed issues pertaining to women’s participation in public life.
On 19 September, the government adopted several laws providing financial and social benefits to citizens.
28OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  stakeholders  raised  concerns  over  potential  vote-buying,  voter intimidation, the use of state resources for campaigning and a blurring of state and party; some of these were credible.
Charges were laid against two incumbent mayors for abuse of office, including for election-related offences.
Isolated politically-motivated incidents occurred across the country, related to attacks on campaign offices and violence against one candidate.
In Shuto Orizari, the incumbent mayoral candidate for the Union of Roma from Macedonia (URM) was attacked and injured.
The incident exposed tensions and a high degree of polarization in the Roma community.
Campaign Finance
Campaign finance regulations have undergone significant development in recent years, in line with previous recommendations of the OSCE/ODIHR, Venice Commission, and Council of Europe’s Group of States against Corruption (GRECO).
However, some recommendations to further enhance transparency in campaign finance remain unaddressed, including auditing requirements for interim campaign finance reports and enhanced oversight authority of the State Audit Office (SAO).
Campaigns are funded by party membership fees and private donations.
The EC limits individual donations,  lists  prohibited  sources  and  sets  a  campaign  spending  limit.
Expenses  are  partly  reimbursed by the local administration for lists that receive at least 1.5 per cent of votes cast in a municipality.
Campaign transactions should be administered through a dedicated bank account.
The SAO exercises campaign finance oversight.
Before election day, it had to receive two interim campaign finance reports from electoral contestants.
Final reports are submitted within four months after the elections and the SAO is required to audit these reports.
The SAO’s limited mandate and resources to review reports does not fulfil transparency and accountability requirements as outlined in international obligations and standards.
The SAO is mandated to act on irregularities based on its initiative or a complaint; no such cases have been reported.
Only a small portion of interim reports were submitted and many contestants used an outdated template,  or  did  not  detail  expenditure  as  required  by  the  new  format.
35 Interim  reports  were published  online  by  the  SEC.
In  three  cases,  expenditures  exceeded  income.
Furthermore, expenses were not broken down by municipality, hindering the ability to determine compliance with spending limits.
Media
The media landscape, characterized by a large number of operators in a relatively small market, includes  170  media  outlets.
Television  is  the  main  source  of  information,  the  circulation  of newspapers is low, while growing Internet penetration has led to a significant development of online news websites.
Overall, the media is divided along political lines.
According to OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors, concerns still persist on low professional standards in a number of media outlets to the detriment of the public’s right to receive objective and balanced reporting.
The Constitution guarantees freedom of expression and prohibits censorship.
The EC requires all media, including news websites, to cover the elections in a fair, balanced and unbiased manner.
The public broadcaster’s Macedonian Radio Television (MRT) news coverage of elections is strictly regulated as is the paid advertising in private media.
However, the EC does not explicitly provide for equitable media coverage for independent candidates.
Media compliance with the legal requirements is monitored by the Agency for Audio and Audiovisual Media Services (AVMS), which may apply sanctions and refer the matter to the relevant court.
The AVMS conducted systematic media monitoring and regularly published reports.
The AVMS started six  misdemeanour  proceedings  on  violations  pertaining  to  paid  political  advertising,  unbalanced reporting and the publication of opinion polls.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM media monitoring results showed that as required by the EC, the public broadcaster  provided  all  contestants  with  a  free  airtime  within  prime time.
However,  only  26 candidates used this opportunity on MTV1.
The Albanian speaking candidates did not request any free airtime on MTV2.
The MRT’s news coverage disadvantaged smaller parties and independent candidates, limiting voters’ access to information.
On MTV1, the SDSM received 37 per cent of coverage, VMRO-DPMNE 32 per cent, DUI 11 per cent and BESA 7 per cent.
Other parliamentary parties were given a combined total of 9 per cent coverage, while non-parliamentary received 3 per cent and independent candidates were allotted 1 per cent.
MTV2 dedicated more time to the ethnic Albanian parties.
Private  media  provided  predominant  coverage  to  the  SDSM-led  coalition  mainly  due  to  paid advertising.
The SDSM received 47 per cent of the total coverage, followed by the VMRO-DPMNE with 29 per cent and DUI with 17 per cent.
The SDSM aired negative advertisements throughout the campaign.
Overall, monitored private electronic media demonstrated a rather neutral tone towards candidates in editorial coverage.
Both  public  and  private  broadcast  media  conducted  debates  among  mayoral  candidates  in  their respective  municipalities  and  in  the  MRT  studio  in  Skopje.
The  debates  were  well  organized; however,  OSCE/ODIHR  EOM  media  monitoring  results  showed  that  a  high  number  of  invited VMRO-DPMNE candidates did not participate.
Social  media  was  widely  used  in  the  campaign.
A  high  number  of  candidates  opened  official Facebook pages for campaigning.
Overall, candidates from larger parties, particularly the VMRO-DPMNE, used social media more frequently compared to other parties and independent candidates.
Complaints and Appeals
The SEC, SCPC, SAO and Administrative Court adjudicate various election-related complaints and appeals, while basic courts have jurisdiction over civil and criminal cases.
A number of interlocutors informed international observers that they lacked trust in the ability of the election administration and courts to handle election-related cases impartially.
Five Administrative Court judges, who are under pending indictment for the misuse of office in handling a key complaint in the 2013 municipal elections, continued to handle complaints and appeals in these elections, contributing to the perception of bias.
Transparency is reduced by the Administrative Court holding closed sessions.
The EC provides a limited framework for effective legal redress in electoral disputes.
While certain decisions of the SEC and MECs are subject to judicial review, most are not, thus significant aspects of the electoral process are under the final authority of the election administration, contrary to OSCE commitments and international good practice.
Stakeholders have limited rights to seek a legal remedy for campaign-related violations, also at odds with international obligations.
Voter and civic groups have limited rights to challenge irregularities and cannot appeal election results.
Prior to election day, the SEC received few complaints under its limited jurisdiction.
While various OSCE/ODIHR EOM interlocutors raised concerns on the misuse of administrative resources during the campaign, vote-buying and pressure on voters, only a few such complaints were submitted to the SCPC, some of which are under investigation.
Notably, the SCPC’s authority was undermined by parliament when it dismissed the general prosecutor on 17 August, despite such a decision being in violation of the EC.
Participation of National Minorities
Although interethnic relations play a role in municipal elections, they did not feature prominently in the  campaign.
Candidates  and  lists  tend  to  reflect  the  ethnic  composition  of  a  particular municipality.
In  several  cases,  however,  candidates  sought  votes  from  across  ethnic  lines.
In municipalities with an ethnic Albanian majority, several ethnic Albanian parties in the ruling coalition were competing against each other, including high profile candidates.
Parties  representing  smaller  ethnic  communities  fielded  mayoral  candidates  in  only  a  few municipalities where such ethnic groups are concentrated, including Turks in Centar Zhupa and Plasnica, and the Roma in Shuto Orizari.
In other localities, smaller communities presented lists of candidates for councils either with the parties representing such communities or as members of larger coalitions.
Smaller parties complained to the OSCE/ODHIR EOM of not having a SEC member and that they are underrepresented in the local election administration.
The atmosphere was calm in areas where minorities reside, while strong and confrontational rhetoric were observed by candidates belonging to the same community, such as among ethnic Albanian candidates in Struga.
The national media devoted little airtime and space to candidates representing smaller communities and themes relevant to them were afforded limited coverage.
Citizen and International Observers
The EC foresees citizen and international observers’ access to all stages of the electoral process and the binding SEC Code of Conduct calls for impartiality and non-interference in the electoral process.
In  a  timely  and  inclusive  process  the  SEC  accredited  6  citizen  and  24  international  observer organizations, contributing to the transparency of the electoral process.
Citizen observers assessed the preparations for the elections and conduct of the campaign across the country, which offered a non-partisan assessment of the elections.
In addition, a civic initiative was launched to assist persons with disabilities  to  exercise  their  voting  rights.
For  election  day,  the  SEC  accredited  3,000  citizen observers; 2,800 from MOST and 200 from CIVIL.
Contestants also accredited their representatives.
Election Day
Early voting and election day progressed in an orderly manner in most parts of the country.
However, some procedural irregularities were observed, particularly during counting and tabulation.
Police initiated seven cases on alleged vote-buying in five municipalities.
Three of them were referred for prosecution.
Transparency was enhanced by the presence of party and citizen observes in 76 and 52 per cent, respectively, of polling stations observed.
Homebound voters cast their votes on 14 October.
This was negatively assessed in 14 of 96 cases observed.
Vote secrecy was compromised in 13 cases, while in 7 cases, EBs did not use the ballot box.
In several prisons, some inmates were not included in voter lists as they did not have valid ID cards.
Opening was assessed by international observers as good or very good in 75 of 82 polling stations observed.
Most  polling  stations  opened  on  time  or  with  a  slight  delay  with  minor  procedural irregularities observed.
In 14 cases, protocols were not filled in before opening; and in 5 cases, party observers were observed to be interfering in the process.
Voting  was  assessed  positively  in  94  per  cent  of  polling  stations  observed.
The  most  frequent irregularities included family/group and proxy voting (8 and 2 per cent, respectively), improperly sealed ballot boxes (2 per cent), and attempts to influence voter’s choice (1 per cent).
The layout of polling stations insufficiently protected vote secrecy in 2 per cent of observations.
The SEC received requests from more than 10 MECs seeking instructions on how to address irregularities.
Voters could not find their names on voter lists in nine per cent of polling stations observed.
The SEC received more than 45 complaints concerning the denial of the right to vote; most were rejected.
T Braille ballot sleeves were available in 8 per cent of polling stations observed, and more than two thirds of polling stations observed had a wheelchair accessible voting booth.
Counting was assessed as efficient and transparent in 69 out of 78 polling stations observed.
However, in 9 cases, prescribed procedures were not followed, in 15 cases, EBs did not properly invalidate unused ballots and did not determine the number of voters who voted, in 11 cases, unauthorized persons counted ballots.
In 12 cases, EBs faced difficulties in completing protocols.
During tabulation, in 65 out of 71 MECs observed, most followed procedures.
However, deficiencies in transparency (3 cases), insufficient space (12 cases) and disorganization (6 cases) extended the process in six MECs.
In 14 MECs, observers did not have a sufficient view of the data entry process, which limited transparency.
The  SEC  started  releasing  preliminary  results  shortly  after  polls  closed,  which  contributed  to transparency; however, results were not disaggregated by polling station, limiting their scrutiny.
The SEC announced preliminary voter turnout at 60 per cent.
MISSION INFORMATION AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Skopje, 16 October 2017 – This Statement of Preliminary Findings and Conclusions is the result of a common  endeavour  involving  the  OSCE  Office  for  Democratic  Institutions  and  Human  Rights (OSCE/ODIHR) and the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe (Congress).
The assessment was made to determine whether the elections complied with OSCE commitments,  other  international  obligations  and  standards  for  democratic  elections,  and  with national legislation.
Ambassador  Audrey  Glover  is  the  Head  of  the  OSCE/ODIHR  Election  Observation  Mission, deployed from 13 September and Karim Van Overmeire (Belgium) led the Congress delegation.
Both institutions involved in this International Election Observation Mission have endorsed the 2005 Declaration  of  Principles  for  International  Election  Observation.
This  Statement  of  Preliminary Findings and Conclusions is delivered prior to the completion of the electoral process.
The final assessment of the elections will depend, in part, on the conduct of the remaining stages of the electoral process, including the tabulation of results and the handling of possible post-election day complaints and appeals.
The OSCE/ODIHR will issue a comprehensive final report, including recommendations for  potential  improvements,  some  20  weeks  after  the  completion  of  the  electoral  process.
The Congress will present its report at its 34th Session in March 2018.
The OSCE/ODIHR EOM includes 17 experts in the capital and 20 long-term observers deployed throughout the country.
On  election day, 208  observers were deployed, including a 13-member delegation from the Congress, which included 12 Council of Europe Member States.
OSCE/ODIHR observers were drawn from 31 OSCE participating States.
The observers wish to thank the authorities of the host country for the invitation to observe the elections, and the State Election Commission for its assistance.
They also wish to express their appreciation  to  other  state  institutions,  political  parties  and  civil  society  organizations  and  the international community representatives for co-operation.
